The 1660s: Chronology

1666/1 Demetrio Music by Carlo Pallavicino!

[DEMETRIOS]
A dramma per musica Text by Giacomo dall' Angelo

im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1666-01-04~

is) Dedicated to three owners of the theater*
In this partly fictional account, Demetrios, the son of the deposed king of Syria, who had reigned in
the second century BC, was now married to Euridice, who is disguised as the warrior Aristandros.
Stratonica, a daughter by his first marriage, was in love with Seleukos, the son of Antiochos, the king
of Phrygia. Kleitarchos/Clitarco, the general of Demetrios's army, loved Lamia, with whom Demetrios
had now fallen in love.

ics) Given that the winter of 1666 offered a pre-Lenten season of maximum extent, the large number of

offerings with libretti dated in this year is no surprise. All could have been performed in the generous

' Carlo Pallavicino (c. 1640-1688) was to be the most prominent Italian opera composer in the 1670s and 1680s. Born in Sald (on the southwest
shore of Lake Garda), he served as a tenor (from 1649) and then as the organist for instrumentalists (organista ai concerti; from 1665) at
the church of Sant' Antonio in Padua. He appeared in operas in Venice from 1654. From c. 1667 to 1672, he worked at the Saxon court in
Dresden as vice Kapellmeister to the aging Heinrich Schiitz. After Schiitz's death (1672), Pallavicino returned to Venice, which remained
his principal residence until 1685. However, he maintained strong ties with the Saxon court, where his son (Stefano Benedetto, b. 1672) was
to serve as court poet (see Selfridge-Field, intro. to Pallavicino: MESSALINA, DMV, viii). This was Pallavicino's first opera.

? Like Aureli, Minato, and Businello, he was a member of the Accademia deg' Imperfetti, which exalted history and classical subjects.

3 The words ballo and balli have been retained on the advice of the late Irene Alm, whose extensive study of theatrical dance was truncated
by her untimely death (2000). It was her view that the modern English words dance and ball do not convey the same theatrical implications
as the Italian seicento word ballo. The performers were always in costume. Balli could have their own scenery; their music was often divorced
from surviving scores (and is therefore difficult to locate and identify). By the mid-eighteenth century, ba/li frequently had their own libretti,
could enjoy independent performance, and were more akin to the French ballet than an integral component of opera.

L.e., Giovanni da Mula, Matteo Pisani, and Matteo da Lezze. In 1661 da Lezze was one of three purchasers of a supernumerary position as
a procurator of San Marco (I-Fn A). His peers included Marco Contarini and Daniel Dolfin.

JO &

1666/2

A

5 Cesti (1623-69), a priest from Arezzo, was best known for his operas of the 1650s and early 1660s. His works were very highly esteemed

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1660-69) 83

ten-week period between St. Stephen's and Shrove Tuesday. The libretto for Demetrio was dedicated
on | January 1666 and is likely to have opened by the 4th.

The first ballo may have presented a comic scene within a dignified formation, for the libretto says
that six pageboys were to display an insolent attitude towards the antics of the Old Woman and
Gellido before forming the dance. The choreography for the second ballo was also choreographed
for stage machinery: Apollo appeared in a cloud, Harmony ascended into the sky, and Celestial Rays
made a formation to present the actual ballo. The sets were designed by Gio. Battista Lambranzi, the
costumes by Orazio Franchi.

Score in I-Vnm

Listed as Galvani SMoi 16, Bonlini 96, Groppo 99, Alm 135

L'Orontea Music by Antonio Cesti
[ORONTEA]

A dramma per musica Text by Giacinto Andrea Cicognini
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a prologue' and balli SORTING DATE: 1666-01-11~

Dedicated to Maria Mancini Colonna

The Egyptian queen Orontea was quite forward in expressing her love for an apparent stranger and
commoner, Alidoros, who proved to be the Phoenician prince Floridano in disguise and therefore a
suitable match. The work contained numerous comic roles and five cori.

This was one of several works by Cesti which had been performed to great acclaim (Innsbruck, 1656),
but the text had been used in a setting by Francesco Lucio given in 1649 at the Teatro de' SS. Apostoli.
The dedication for this production was signed on 10 January 1666. Matteo Melissa, a musician in the
employ of Johann Seyfried, prince of Eggenberg, wrote from Aquileia on 12 March 1666 that he had
been impressed by all the operas he heard in Venice during this season. He singled out this work as
the most beautiful. The role of Hypsipyle/Issipile was taken by Signora Helena, who, he said, was
in the employ of the Colonna family. He said that SS. Giovanni e Paolo surpassed the other theaters
in the charm of its scenery, the unusual costumes, and the virtue of its famous singers. L 'Orontea
was revived at SS. Giovanni e Paolo as 1683/7.

The theater had contracted with Gasparo Mauro the preceding March to serve as impresario for the
1665-66 season. His contract stipulated that two operas should be produced during this period. Mauro
was paid the fee of 100 ducats. It appears that one of the works was to have been a setting of Giovanni
Faustini's Doriclea, but ten days prior to the writing of the dedication for L 'Orontea, that production
was postponed in favor of this one. Current costs, though undocumented, are unlikely to have been
changed from two years previously, when the theater had charged 4 Jire per seat and 2 lire for each
ticket (bolletino).'

Scores (1656) in GB-Cmc; I-PAc, Rsc, Rvat
Listed as Galvani SSGP 39, Bonlini 98, Groppo 101, Alm 137

during his lifetime. In April 1666 he became the director of theater music at the court in Vienna.

 The Florentine Giacinto Andrea Cicognini was best known for his libretti for this work and for that of Cavalli's Orontea.

7 The music for the prologue (for Ignorance, Ambition, Virtue, and Glory) was from P. A. Ziani's as yet unperformed Doriclea.

5 Maria Mancini (b. 1639), a niece of Cardinal Mazarin and reportedly a former mistress of Louis XIV of France, married Lorenzo Onoftio
Colonna (1637-89) in 1661. Both were captivated by spectacle. A decade later Colonna opened two theaters in Rome.

 Chvatilova and Svestka, Eggenbergs, pp. 39-41. Melissa also obtained manuscript copies of Cesti's La Dori and this work. The authors
speculate that the Eggenberg brothers (the other was Johann Christian) may have seen Giasone on a tour of Italy three years earlier. A letter
written by Melissa on 12 December says that La Dori had now been recopied because so many errors were found in the earlier copy.

' Mauro had the amount changed to 150 ducats on 14 May 1666 (Mancini et al., Teatri, I, 311).

84 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1666/3 La Zenobia Music attributed to Giovanni Antonio Boretti"'
[ZENOBIA]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's?)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1666-01-18~
& Dedicated to Filippo Giuliano Mazarin Mancini?

The reign of Zenobia, the queen of Palmyra, was threatened by the Roman emperor Aurelian (270-275
AD), who was favored by her adversary, the governor of Palmyra. In this work, Zenobia's virtue stood
her in good stead.'* Zenobia included five cori, one of them consisting of Amazons.'

Oo This is one of only two musical works given at San Cassiano between 1659 and 1679. (The theater's
schedule generally favored comedy.) The title-page merely gives the date 1666, but Zenobia would
certainly have run in the winter, perhaps somewhat later than suggested here. As Zenobia e Radamisto,
Noris's text enjoyed a substantial following. Legrenzi's setting of it was given in Ferrara (1665), Brescia
(1666), Verona (1667), and Macerata (1669). Indeed there would seem to be some possibility, in light
of its dedicatee, that this production was based on Legrenzi's setting, which was also to be given at
SS. Giovanni e Paolo as 1677/2.

A No musical sources known'
Listed as Galvani SCas 20, Bonlini 97, Groppo 100, Alm 136

1666/4 Seleuco Music by Antonio Sartorio"
[SELEUKOS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Nicole Minato'
M1 Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1666-01-23~
& Dedicated to Paolo Spinola

The apocryphal story of the founding of the Seleukid dynasty by a general of Alexander the Great was
often recounted in Venetian opera. In this alternative to Demetrio (1666/1) the retired general Seleukos,
now king of Syria, made a politically advantageous marriage at an advanced age to the young Asian
princess Stratonica. Discovering herself to be in love with her step-son Antiochos, Stratonica asked

"'Itmay have been based on Legrenzi's setting (see below). The Roman bass Gio. Antonio Boretti (1638-72) had sung at Sant' Antonio, Padua,
from 1659 to 1661. He was thereafter active in Venice. The libretto stated that Boretti would appear in the role of the satrap king and that the
scenery was designed by Francesco Santurini.

 The Venetian poet Matteo Noris was to write almost three dozen drammi per musica, the bulk of them set by Pallavicino, Legrenzi, and
C. F. Pollarolo. His texts were typically dedicated to the most powerful rulers who visited Venice in a given season.

'' Filippo Giuliano [Philippe Julien] Mancini, the duke of Nevers, was the brother of Maria Mancini Colonna. He was more likely to accompany
her to the theater than her errant husband.

'\ The story was recast by Marchi for Albinoni as 1694/5.

'S In Greek legend, the Amazons, a race of female warriors from Asia Minor, engaged various heroes in battle. In the Venetian lore of the later
seventeenth century, Amazons were contemporary heroines because they exhibited the courage and valor desired in the Republic's defenders.
On a comprehensive discussion of Amazons in Baroque opera, see Freeman, Amazons.

6 The third act of an anonymous Zenobia in A-Wn may be linked to this production.

7 Sartorio (c. 1630-1680), Kapellmeister to Duke Johann Friedrich of Brunswick-Liineburg, spent most of his time in Hanover for the next
nine years. He served as vice maestro di cappella at San Marco from 1676 until his death.

' Count Minato (c. 1627-1698), from Bergamo, had written the libretti for a number of Francesco Cavalli's most celebrated operas (among
them Scipione africano, Muzio Scevola, and Pompeo Magno). All carried dedications to members of the Colonna family  Lorenzo Onofrio
Colonna, his wife, Maria Mancini, and her brother, Filippo Giuliano Mancini. Here Minato's authorship night be questioned on the basis of
statements in the note to the reader alluding to Neapolitan origins and an author who was far away.

 Spanish duke of Sesto and marquis of Los Balbases. He was the general of the cavalry of Milan. His family held lands in the region of Naples
and in Spain.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1660-69) 85

the royal physician for a cure for her disloyalty. When the physician revealed her secret love to
Seleukos, the general consented to her liaison with the son.

oo The libretto for Seleuco was dedicated on 16 January 1666. Francesco Galli (Il Milanese) appears
to have taken the title role in the original production. The other singers in San Salvatore's company
for the 1665-66 season were Antonio Fontana (Formenti), Alessandro da Livorno, Stefano di
Bentivoglio, Paolo Rivani, and the blind singer from Milan [Antonio Rivani, also called Ciecolino].

o San Salvatore, which had a long association with comedy in the French style, was especially noted
for its balli. Seleuco featured a social dance, i.e., a ball of ladies and gentlemen (dame e cavallieri)
accompanied by the continuous playing of instruments.' Seleuco was revived as 1668/1. A setting by
Antonio Draghi (Zaleuco) was given in Vienna in 1675.

A Score in I-Vnm; arias in GB-Lbl; I-Nc
Listed as Galvani SSal 7, Bonlini 99, Groppo 102, Alm 138

1666/5 Il Tito Music by Antonio Cesti
[Titus]

A melodramma Text by Nicold Beregan

"1 Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1666-02-13

& Dedicated to Maria Mancini Colonna, Lorenzo Onofrio Colonna, and Filippo Giuliano Mazarin Mancini

&S Titus, the son of Vespasian, led Roman legions in their attack on Jerusalem in the first century A.D.
This attack was featured in the opening scene of the work, which devolved into a tangle of amorous
complications involving Agrippa and his sister Berenice, her admirer Ptolemy, Titus's brother Domitian,
and his cousin Flavia. Horses, camels, and elephants were seen in the army's camp. Titus was shown
in a billowing cape upon a very muscular horse on the frontispiece. Other scenes were full of statues,
palm trees, gardens, and fountains.

O@ JI Tito opened on 15 February 1666 (GB-Lpro); the libretto had been dedicated on the 13th. It was the
second of the two works produced during the season by Gasparo Mauro. Pietr' Andrea Ziani compared
its reception with that of Pompeo Magno (1666/8) ina letter written the following June. He observed
that Beregan should be thanked for having recruited the virtuosa from Rome who carried the work.
Mancini Colonna left her own account of the work, about which she was highly enthusiastic. She
identified four singers, among whom Gio. Antonio Cavagna made the greatest impression. She praised
the sweetness of the voices, the style of acting, and the beauty of the piece, which was applauded by
everyone and which was assuredly among the most beautiful works I have ever seen in my life.

? He sang arias for Seleuco in a later concert at the convent of San Daniele. See the commentary under Pompeo Magno (below).

2! The claim in Alm, Winged Feet, p. 228 that this was the first social dance in Venetian opera is undermined by accounts of similar scenes
in earlier works, such as Achille in Sciro (Suppl. 2a, 1664). A further excerpt appears on pp. 260f.

 Beregan (1627-1713), a lawyer from Vicenza, was renowned for his knowledge of classical subjects. In 1657 he had been deprived of his
nobility and banned from the Venetian Republic (apparently for carrying weapons; see I-Vas, Consiglio dei Dieci, Proclame a stampa, Filza
2, proclamation of 5 Febraro 1656 [M. V.]), but his sentence was reversed within the year (I-Vas, CX, Proclame, Busta 29, entry of 22 Dicembre
1657).

3 Lorenzo Onofrio Colonna later built two theaters in Rome  the Tordinona for comedy and the Colonna (inside the family palazzo) for
opera (these are the subject of Tamburini's monograph, Due teatri per il prencipe). Between 1664 and 1678 some eleven Venetian operas
were dedicated to one or more members of the extended Colonna family. Several productions were among the most lavish ever to be given
in Venice.

> Letter of 9 June 1666 to Marco Faustini, quoted in Rosand, Opera, p. 437.

5 Tamburini, Due teatri, pp. 96f. The other singers were Sebastiano Cioni and Antonia and Nicold Coresi.

86 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

A Scores in I-Ne, Rvat, Vnm*
Listed as Galvani SSGP 40, Bonlini 100, Groppo 103, Alm 139, 140

1666/6 Tl Giasone Music attributed to Francesco Cavalli?'
[JASON]
A dramma per musica Text by Giacinto Andrea Cicognini
Md Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a prologue and balli SORTING DATE: 1666-02-23
w& Dedicated to Benedetto Zorzi, Giacomo Celsi, and Carlo Andrea Tron

In his quest for the golden fleece, Jason/Giasone, the captain of the argonauts, abandoned Hypsipyle.
He then fell in love with a stranger, who proved to be Medea in disguise. He discovered her identity
only the night before he was to sail, when she attempted to negotiate a successful outcome to his mission
through her incantations, with which this work opens.

Oo- With this revival, Giasone, which had most recently been given at the Teatro ai Saloni (1664; Suppl.
7), returned to its original venue.* Cicognini's text was dedicated on 23 February 1666, which must
be new-style because of the long Carnival season in 1666 (in 1667 the 23rd was Ash Wednesday). The
prologue was new. Rosand claims that // Giasone was the most frequently performed dramma per musica
of its century (it enjoyed at least twenty-two productions in Italy through 1690).*! The text for this
production was exceptionally long.*? Crescimbeni, while respecting its dramatic construction, later (1700)
condemned its mixing of literary genres and the intrusiveness of its arias.

fi Scores (1664) in A-Wn; B-Bc; GB-Ouf; I-Fn, MOe, Nc, Rvat, Sc, Vmn; P-La
Listed as Galvani SCas 21, Bonlini 102, Groppo 105, Alm 142, 143

1666/7 _L'Aureliano Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[AURELIAN]
A dramma per musica Text by Count Giacomo dall' Angelo
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a prologue and balli SORTING DATE: 1666-02-25
rai) Dedicated to Ippolito and Ferrante Bentivoglio

The Roman emperor Aurelian, after conquering the Goths and the Scythians, fixed his sights on the
lands ruled by Zenobia, queen of the entire Orient. Many of the episodes introduced were freely
invented, quite in contrast to Noris's Zenobia (1666/3), which ran a month earlier. The work had a large
cast. The prologue featured seven gods and represented four continents.

OE The libretto for L 'Aureliano was dedicated on 25 February 1666, which must be new-style (see 1666/6
and 1666/8). One performance of the work was apparently interrupted by the remonstrations of Zuane

6 Facs, edn. in DMV, v. Three arias were reportedly published in Amsterdam in 1691. Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613) claimed
to possess a copy of the score.

2 The most prolific composer of operas in Venice in the middle decades of the seventeenth century, Francesco Cavalli (1602-76) enjoyed
his greatest fame in connection with the works (chief among which was the opera Ercole amante) he prepared for the wedding of Louis XIV
(first intended for performance in 1660 but not actually given until 1662, in Paris). Having excelled in his youth as a singer, Cavalli also ascended
through the musical ranks at San Marco to become the Ducal Chapel's maestro di cappella (1668-76).

28 Owners of San Cassiano.

? In the libretto, an aborted effort to mount a production of Moniglia's Semiramide (see 1670) is mentioned.
3 It had first been produced at San Cassiano in 1649.

3! Seifert (La figura) has recently claimed more than 30 productions for Cesti's La Dori.

* Le., 90 pages, plus four (unnumbered) containing added arias for Medea and Delfa.

> The marquises of the Bentivoglio family were counts of Antignago and honorary members of the Venetian nobility.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1660-69) 87

Carbon (identity unknown), who was tried by the Inquisitori di Stato on 25 September 1667 for throwing
onto the stage [of San Moise] and against the boxes [various items] sold in shops of food and drink
outside the theater during the previous season of music while many others were present.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SMoi 11, Bonlini 103, Groppo 106, Alm 144

1666/8 Pompeo Magno Music attributed to Francesco Cavalli
[POMPEY THE GREAT]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Nicold Minato
rr Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1666-02-27
& Dedicated to Maria Mancini Colonna

After Pompey the Great had imprisoned Hypsicrateia/Ipsicratia, the queen of Pontos, and her son
Pharnakes/Farnace, in Rome, his son Sextus/Sesto was wrongly accused of the murder of Hypsicrateia's
lady-in-waiting. Pompey entertained thoughts of adopting Pharnakes, who betrayed his father, Mithridates,
as he plotted to kill Pompey.

 Documentary evidence and dates of dedication in printed libretti give contrary readings of the order
of works given at San Salvatore in the winter of 1666. The year itself can easily be distinguished by
its maximally late dates for Shrove Tuesday (9 March) and Easter (25 April). An opera rehearsal which
took place at the convent of San Daniele on 26 February 1666 included arias for Seleuco** (see 1666/4).
Other indications suggest that the work in preparation late in February should have been Pompeo Magno
[libretto dedicated on 20 February 1666]. In this case, Seleuco could be the person who took the role
of Seleukos [Francesco Galli] in the preceding work. The British resident [consul] noted, also on 26
February, the arrival of the prince of Bavaria, the duke of Sesto, and other foreigners and said that
a new work was recited at San Salvatore the previous evening.*

 The three ball/i were entertainments in their own right, although the first two were taken over from the
earlier Cavalli opera Muzio Scevola. The first called for four live horses with mounted riders, the second
for eight mad people, and the third for twelve ghosts. The supernumeraries of the cast included comics,
allegorical figures, choruses, servants, slaves, prisoners, gentlewomen, gentlemen, pages, soldiers, Moors,
and ordinary people  in addition to fifteen roles. The principal members of the cast would have been
as indicated in Vio's documentation (see 1666/4)  Francesco Galli, Antonio Fontana (Formenti),
Alessandro da Livorno (a 15-year-old soprano), Stefano di Bentivoglio, Paolo da Rivani (who played
the old woman), and the blind singer from Milan.

* The libretto for Seleuco (1666/4) was dedicated on 16 January 1666. According to Vio, I monasteri, pp. 306ff, on the last Friday of the
month (26 February), the protectors of San Salvatore and their wives smuggled four singers into the convent of San Daniele, so they could
rehearse without the interruptions they were encountering in the theater. They presented most of an opera, from after the midday meal until
23:00 O.V. The theater owners were Pietro [Piero] Foscarini, Pietro [Piero] Dolfin, and Tomaso Corner. The wives of the first two collected
two of the singers in their gondola and brought them to a water entrance at the convent so that they would not be seen arriving on the street.

+5 The duke of Sesto was the dedicatee of Seleuco, while the Bavarian royals were fans of Seleuco's composer, Sartorio. An unanswered question
is how much earlier the other visitors had arrived.

% Reported in GB-Lpro, SPV, Ser. 101, Box 83 (1667-1714), entry of 26 Febbraio 1666, f. 2r. Taken together with Vio's documentation,
one reading is that the singers had given a dress rehearsal on the 25th which was marred by distractions and absences, necessitating the secret
rehearsal in the convent to better prepare for an imminent formal opening.

3 This is the only work known to have included an equestrian exhibition within an opera in Venice, although large live animals appeared in
several other works, e.g., Tito (1666/5); see also Suppl. Se. The depiction in Pompeo Magno was accompanied by trumpets and other instruments.
In the ballo for pazzi which concluded Act One, two of the madmen were mad for alchemy, two for painting, two for music, and two for poetry.

88 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Various nuns assisted (in unspecified ways) in the convent rehearsal, at which no independent

instrumentalists were present. The singers took turns accompanying each other. The contrast between

that event and the work as staged could not be starker. The participants (in particular Formenti, who

had sung in convents before) were severely reprimanded by the authorities for violating protocol.
fi Scores in D-AN; I-Vnm

Listed as Galvani SSal 8, Bonlini 101, Groppo 104, Alm 141

1666/9 L'Alciade Music by Pietr' Andrea Ziani'
[ALKIADES]
A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Faustini
rd Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's?)
With a prologue and balli* SORTING DATE: 1666-12-14~
& Dedicated to Gio. Carlo and Vincenzo Grimani, NN.VV.
 Alkiades/Alciade,TM the disinherited king of Sicania [the ancient name for Sicily], was in love with the

beautiful Charisde, who was thought to be the daughter of Helenos/Eleno. She was the wife of the Sicilian
prince Eurystheos/Euristeo, whose sister, Idiotheia, was in love with Alkiades. Recognizing that Charisde
was not obtainable, Alkiades set sail for Sardinia. The action began in Calabria, where the wedding
of the king was being celebrated. Given that the dedication is undated, that the title-page is dated 1667,
and that another production (La Dori, 1667/1) was to follow this one in mid-January, it seems likely
that Alciade opened in mid-December 1666.

 The identity of various members of the cast can be ascertained from a series of surviving letters written
between July 1665 and November 1666, the period over which the work was evidently in gestation
and preparation. The same series of letters also documents how malleable works were while issues
of casting, composition, and performance were under negotiation. Antonio Cavagna complained in
October 1665 that the opera company [at SS. Giovanni e Paolo] was changed. It lacked good female
singers, he said, and did not have an adequate number of male singers. He wanted to sing with instruments
which would be tuned to Roman pitch [lower than the Venetian], a practice which would be congenial
for his voice, as it had in his previous appearances in Statira [1655] and Teseo [Elena rapita da Teseo,
1653].
Ziani noted that Cavagna (Cavagnino) was to sing the second-act lament (Pil per me non vi e
contenti) very slowly with a discreet accompaniment of viole. The soprano Giulio Cesare was cast
as Eurystheos. The part of the boat captain (// Nocchiero) was scored for the baritone Giacinto, and
that of Lerilda [for whom no role is indicated in the libretto] for any competent soprano. Antonio

38 While the work is not named in the report, the role taken by Galli was explicitly that of Seleukos.

 Vio, I monasteri, pp. 306ff.

* The Dance of the Spirits (fantasmi; called ombre in the libretto) from Pompeo Magno is shown in reduction in Alm, Winged Feet, p. 253.
The suite (balletto) for madmen (pazzi) follows on pp. 256f. The group included two roles each for Music, Painting, Alchemy, and Poetry.

*" 4 Lateran canon, Ziani (1616-84) enjoyed an illustrious career as a composer, serving as vice Kapellmeister to the dowager empress at the
Imperial court (1662-69), then as organist at San Marco (1669-76) and lastly as organist and later maestro di cappella at the Viceregal Chapel
in Naples for the final years of his life.

* One of the most important of the first generation of opera librettists, Faustini wrote the texts for approximately twenty drammi per musica.
The works were produced at San Cassiano, SS. Apostoli, and SS. Giovanni e Paolo, where his brother Marco was the impresario. Extensive
information on the Faustinis' negotiations with SS. Giovanni e Paolo can be found in recent writings by Ellen Rosand, Beth Glixon, the late
Thomas Walker, and others.

* The second ballo was for acrobats (saltatori).

* Alciade(s), although not generally recognized as a Greek name, was one widely used in Italian drama. Many names used in Venetian opera
were invented, although usually they occurred as assumed names or for characters of humble origin. The hero of this story is not the same
as the figure whose son, according to Herodotus, defended Greece against the Egyptians.

5 Antonio Cavagna to Marco Faustini, 17 Ottobre 1665 (Rosand, Opera, p. 437). Both works cited by Cavagna were set by Cavalli.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1660-69) 89

da Murano (Idiotea) was asked to double as the old woman Clipea in Act Three. As the production
approached, Antonia (Tonina') Coresi did not want to perform in the prologue, she wrote to Marco
Faustini, because she had never done such a thing before. Antonio Cavagna was dubious about appearing
as a Moor in Act Three on similar grounds. He feared that he might be upstaged by appearing with
two angels  Antonia [Coresi] and Giulia [Masotti]. Masotti was dissatisfied with her part also
and wanted to sing instead in the recreation of a Cesti opera preferably L 'Argia (1669/1) or Alessandro
[vincitor di se stesso; Venice, 1651]. Her wish was partly met by casting her in La Dori (1667/1).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 41, Bonlini 104, Groppo 107, Alm 146

1667/1 La Dori, overo Lo schiavo reggio Music by Antonio Cesti
[Dor!, OR THE ROYAL SLAVE]
A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Filippo Apolloni**
im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a prologue and balli SORTING DATE: 1667-01-20~
& Dedicated to Maria Mancini Colonna

The Persian king Artaxerxes and the Nicaean king Archelaos agreed when their children were infants
that Orontes, the son of the first, would marry Dori, the elder daughter of the second. The enemies of
these royal friends upset this arrangement so that Orontes, seeking to claim his bride, was redirected
first to Arsinoe and then to the Egyptian imposter Dori. The real Dori had been kidnaped by pirates
and taken to Babylonia. The work was situated on the banks of the Euphrates. The scenes from the
Babylonian serraglio found in earlier versions of the work were replaced here by military exercises.

io) The dedication date of 16 January 1667 must be new-style; the opening of Carnival was anticipated
on the 14th (GB-Lpro). The production was a revival specially arranged for the dedicatee. The text
was revised in eight days. An explanatory note in the libretto relates that it was difficult to find the original
score for the music (which had been given in 1663 at San Salvatore).

Oo La Dori was, in its time, a truly famous work. First staged in 1657 on a grand scale in Innsbruck, the
score left a long trail of copies. Bonlini wrote of the 1663 production at San Salvatore that it merited
universal applause.*' Gasparo Origo [the impresario?] wrote to Marco Faustini in October 1666 to
suggest that Giulia [Masotti] should be cast in one of the principal roles. Masotti's reputation as a
singer was difficult to disentangle from her performances in the role of Dori. The work was revived
at SS. Giovanni e Paolo (1670/6).

 Pietr' Andrea Ziani to Marco Faustini, letter of 28 November 1665[!], transcribed in Rosand, Opera, p. 437. It may be that a production was
envisioned one year earlier. Numerous remarks in the letter leave no doubt that the work discussed was Alciade. It seems most likely that Ziani
composed the work a year before its production. Ziani had written to Faustini on 25 Luglio 1665 (op. cit., p. 436) saying that the work [submitted
to him] seems a bit dry, especially the soliloquies, and is devoid of canzonettes.... Long soliloquies are abhorred today. He goes on to state
that he would like 200 ducats, just as he had received for setting L amor guerriero (1663). No role for La vecchia Clipea survives in the
libretto, which suggests (as does the name itself) that it was a comic role.

' Letters of 3 Novembre 1666 (Coresi) and 14 Novembre 1666 (Cavagna) transcribed in Rosand, Opera, p. 438. Additional information on
Masotti from Bianconi, // teatro, p. 21.

8 Often called Apollonio Apolloni, this librettist (c. 1635-1688) from Arezzo served the Austrian court at Innsbruck (1653-59) before entering
the service of Cardinal Chigi in Rome (1660-88).

 In the 1663 version the satrap was Artaxerxes, the tutor of Orontes. In this version the role is simply called Satrape.
* The 1663 work had been dedicated to the French bishop-ambassador Pierre de Bensy.
*' Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 61.

* Gasparo Origo, writing to Marco Faustini, 2 Ottobre 1666 (Rosand, Opera, p. 438), suggested the role of Argia, apparently meaning Arsinoe.
Giulia Masotti (La Dori) sang in the 1670 production, but Giulia de Caro was a frequent performer at SS. Giovanni e Paolo.

90

1667/2

QO

1667/3

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Scores (Innsbruck, 1657) in A-Wn (Innsbruck, 1665);> D-MUs; GB-Lbl, I-MOe, Vnm (Venice, 1667)
Listed as Galvani SSGP 42, Bonlini 106, Groppo 109, Alm 149

La prosperita d'Elio Seiano Music by Antonio SartorioTM
[THE GOOD FORTUNE OF HELVIUS SEJANUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Nicolo Minato
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival, Fat Week)
With a prologue and balli SORTING DATE: 1667-01-22~

Dedicated to Johann Friedrich, Duke of Brunswick

Helvius Sejanus, who faithfully served the emperor Tiberius [14-37 AD], passed through the rank of
captain of the praetorian guard before succeeding his master. The path to this succession was strewn
with obstacles presented by envious enemies and was complicated both by Tiberius's wish that his
successor should marry Agrippina, the sister of Gaius Caesar, and by the ghost of Tiberius's son Drusus,
whom Sejanus had killed in battle.

The dedication date of 15 January 1666 must be old-style  both because the note to the reader explains
that this work was intended to be performed in regular night-by-night alternation with La caduta di
[Elio] Seiano, for which the dedication was dated 1667 (see below), and because the theater was otherwise
engaged in 1666. It is likely that, in common with 1667/3, the performance included two singers from
the Brunswick court. The harmony of [Sartorio's] notes was guaranteed to delight the audience,
according to the libretto. The work was given in a setting by Draghi (with arias by Leopold 1) in Vienna
on the emperor's birthday (6 June) in 1671. See also 1729/11.

Scores in I-Ne, Rvat, Rps; arias in -MOe, Nc, Rvat, Vmc, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSal 9, Bonlini 105, Groppo 108; Alm 147, 148

L' Alessandro amante Music by Giovanni Antonio Boretti
[ALEXANDER AS LOVER]

A dramma per musica Text by Giacinto Andrea Cicognini, rev. Sebastian Enno?>
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a prologue and balli SORTING DATE: 1667-01-30

Dedicated to Giovanni Mocenigo, N.V.**

This adaptation of Cicognini's text for Gliamori d'Alessandro e di Rossane (SS. Apostoli, 1651) focused
on the battle of the Macedonians and the satraps.* The Macedonian leader, Alexander the Great, fell
in love with Roxane/Rossane, the daughter of the Satraps' barbarous leader (in which role the composer
appeared). She was attended by a nurse and numerous ladies-in-waiting.

The production must have opened shortly after the dedication of the libretto (28 January 1667). Sebastian

Enno, the canon of San Pietro di Castello, agreed on 11 December 1666 to sell two libretto texts by
Cicognini (Alessandro and Nino) to the printers Francesco and Stefano Curti. The agreement expressed

5 Facs, edn. in IOB, 63.

* Sartorio was maestro di cappella to the dedicatee.

5 Enno, the canon of Venice's patriarchal seminary (San Pietro di Castello), negotiated the sale of two libretti by Cicognini and signed the
dedication of this work. According to Enno's note to the reader, Cicognini's death prevented his own completion of the work. This version
includes added scenes and arias.

56 Mocenigo served the Republic in some of its outlying reaches, including Bergamo. Alvise Mocenigo was an important naval captain and,
from January 1665, commander of the Mediterranean fleet (I-Fn A).

5 Satraps were Persian provincial governors.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1660-69) 91

the belief that both works would be produced at San Moise during the coming Carnival (only Alessandro
was performed) and implies that Enno revised the texts for theatrical performance.**

 In an unusual summons, Zuane Carbon had to appear before the State Inquisitors in September 1667
to explain why he had strewn quantities of food and drink onto the stage and into the theater's boxes
during the previous musical season, while many persons were present.

Ai No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SMoi 12, Bonlini 107, Groppo 110, Alm 150

1667/4 La caduta d'Elio Seiano Music by Antonio Sartorio
[THE FALL OF HELVIUS SEJANUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Nicole Minato
im Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival, Fat Week)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1667-02-03
&o Dedicated to Amalia, Queen of Denmark and Norway

Continuing the story of La prosperita (1667/2), Agrippina had now become the estranged wife of
Germanicus, brother of the widow of Drusus. Her father, Vespanius, discovering her situation, sought
revenge. The death of Claudius, the brother of Germanicus, intensified the conflict.

 The year in the dedication date (3 February 1667) must be new-style because La caduta was intended
to be performed in alternation with La prosperita d'Elio Seiano (see above). However, the only date
for which a performance the work can be confirmed is 22 February 1667 (GB-Lpro), which was Shrove
Tuesday. While the year of both works taken together is unambiguous, the three-week separation in
dedication dates suggests either that the first was not performed until later than its dedication suggests,
that the dedication of La caduta was from a second printing, or that the works were performed in the
usual serial manner  with one completing its run before the next began.

A Score in I-Vnm
Listed as Galvani SSal 10, Bonlini 108, Groppo 111; Alm 151

 1667a Lo sfortunato paziente. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
 1667b L'Arbace. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

1667/5 =I tiranno umiliato d'Amore Music by Carlo Pallavicino

ovvero I] Meraspe
[THE TYRANT WHO WAS HUMILIATED BY LOVE, OR MERASPES]
A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Faustini, rev. Nicolo BereganTM
im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)

*8 Enno's agreement with the Curti (who printed the libretto) and Zuliani settled the price of the set at 205 ducats. Enno could decide to whom
the works should be dedicated. Any gifts forthcoming from dedications would be retained by the seminary. Enno would be given twenty-five
publications of his own choice from the press. In the event that either work was not performed, Enno was to return the corresponding compensation.
The signatories were Enno, Agostino Mora, Lunardo Corona, Francesco Nicolini, and Stefano Curti. The current location of this agreement,
transcribed in c. 1954 by the late Emil Paul and made available recently by Dwayne Rosengard and Micky White, is not specifically recorded,
apart from a general indication that it comes from notaries' acts in I-Vas. The work called Nino in the contract was obviously not produced
during this season. The next work which included a role for Nino was Moniglia's Semiramide (1670/4). The decision not to produce Nino
came quickly: While Enno agreed on the 12th to repay Stefano Curti 105 ducats (and left the choice of a dedicatee for Nino to the printer),
the actual repayment was made in numerous installments over the next several years.

* Mancini et al., Teatri, i, 186.

 The sister of Johann Friedrich, she was born the princess of Brunswick-Liineburg. The libretto acknowledges the kind donation of the services
of two singers from the court of Brunswick.

! Faustini (termed in a note to the reader of this libretto the Sophocles of the stage and the Euripides of the modern theater) had written
the recitatives of Acts I and II before his death in 1651. The work was completed by Beregan.

92 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

With prologue and balli SORTING DATE: 1667-12-14~
& Dedicated to Don Gasparo de Teves y Cordova
 The libretto for this work is an invented story concerning Meraspes, the tyrannical king of Menfi [Sicily],

who interacted with ten other terrestrial characters. The work also required seven allegorical characters,
eight silent cori, and two baili for pages. In the opening prologue, situated on the banks of the Nile,
two chained lions pulled the blood-stained chariot of Tyranny onto the stage. The libretto, which had
been completed after Faustini's death by Count Beregan, was here identified as a work for autumn.
The production opened shortly before the Novena of Christmas: the dedication was dated 12 December
1667. II tiranno was in progress before the 15th and was still running (no doubt with a break from
16-25 December) on 30 December (GB-Lpro).

 II tiranno umiliato represented the passing of authority from the Faustini family, on whom SS. Giovanni
e Paolo had relied for most of the decade, to the young Grimani brothers, who were to play a leading
role in Venetian theater management for the next four decades. The change was immediately visible
in the increased military emphasis favored by the Grimani. This work featured four groups of Romans
(among them soldiers) and four groups of Arabs (among them prisoners) together with thirteen principal
roles and seven allegorical ones.

 Between June and September prospective singers sent Marco Faustini a stream of complaints about
the weaknesses of the work. They concerned the reuse of musical material already heard in Rome, the
lack of movement and harmonic definition in the basso continuo, a specific role which was too limited,
an overabundance of recitatives (versi), and a paucity of song. Giuseppe Maria Donati (Meraspe) merely
requested easy music. All the other complaints came from [Antonio] Coresi (Caristo). Faustini admitted
to Gasparo Origo in October that this text was less perfect than [his brother Giovanni] Faustini's Alciade,
which had run the previous winter. He said that while Beregan completed Act One [by adding arias
to his brother's recitatives], he tired of the job and the remaining acts were filled in...perhaps too
prolifically from other sources.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 43; Bonlini 109; Groppo 112; Alm 152

1667/6 Eliogabalo Music by Giovanni Antonio Boretti
[ELAGABALUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival?)
With a rissa and a burla SORTING DATE: 1667-12-30
& Dedicated to the brothers Gio. Carlo and Vincenzo Grimani

A Spanish artillery captain in the service of the Empire; current ambassador to the Republic of Venice. His name appears only ona hand-made
title-page prefixed to the libretto. The printed libretto (Alm 152) does not give a dedicatee on the printed title-page, but it does contain a two-page
dedication addressed to an Illustrissimo et eccellentissimo signor by the printer, Bortolo Bruni.

 It appears that a question may have been raised about a possible political subtext of the plot. The permission of the Riformatori dello Studio
di Padova to publish the text is reproduced at the back of the libretto. Dated 24 November 1667, it contains the customary finding that the
work does not contain cosa alcuna contro la Santa Fede Cattolica but goes on to add, quite atypically, e parimente per attestato del Segretario
nostro, niente contro Prencipi, e buoni costumi.

* Rosand, Opera, p. 439.

 On 15 December, Marco Faustini signed over all his rights for the management of the theater (Rosand, Opera, p. 195).
 Rosand, Opera, pp. 238-240. The singers' letters were sent between 13 June and 10 September.

 Giovanni Rossi possessed a copy of the score (I-Vnm, Cod. It. 1613).

 Aureli (fl. 1652-1708) was the sole author of roughly three dozen drammi per musica and a collaborator in roughly a dozen more. He frequently
took female victims and martyrs as his subjects. He signed a contract with the Grimani for Eliogabalo on 10 September 1665 (Mancini et al.,
Teatri, 1, 311).

fi

 1667
1668/1

iM

OP

1668/2

mM

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1660-69) 93

Bassianus was named Roman emperor [218-222 AD] at the age of fifteen. Nicknamed Elagabalus after
the sun-god Baal, he ordered worship of the pagan deity. He flagrantly violated moral standards and
was extravagant in his tastes and edicts. He insisted, for example, that evening activities should take
place during the day and vice versa. He was ultimately murdered by praetorian guards. Many incidental
scenes in this work (such as a burlesque for court buffoons) were invented to portray his depravity.

The libretto for Eliogabalo was dedicated on 10 January 1667, which must be old-style (the title-page
is dated MDCLXVIII). The libretto itself must be revised from an earlier one, for the production appears
to have opened by 30 December 1667 (GB-Lpro). Allusion was made to the upcoming production on
15 December, perhaps because this work's predecessor (JI tiranno, 1667/5) was not well received.
Aureli's note to the reader pays tribute to the scenery of Ippolito Mazzarino, the machines of Gasparo
Mauro, and the costumes of Orazio Franchi as well as the admirable music of Boretti and the exquisite
contribution of the virtuosi. Boretti is likely to have taken one of the roles himself. Among the cori
were one of cavallieri and one of courtesans.

Score in ]-Vnm!

Listed as Galvani SSGP 44; Bonlinil10; Groppo 113; Alm 155, 156

L'anima pentita. Cf. Suppl. 9.

Seleuco Music by Antonio Sartorio
[SELEUKOS]

A dramma per musica Text by Nicold Minato
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1668-01-17~

Dedicated to Valerio da Riva

This revival of 1666/4 was in preparation by 30 December 1667. The dedication is dated 16 January
1668, and the work was running soon after (GB-Lpro), perhaps for the start of Carnival. The production
was modest in its proportions compared to recent ones at SS. Giovanni e Paolo.

Score in I-Vnm (1666); arias in GB-Lbl

Listed as Galvani SSal 11; Bonlini 111; Groppo 114; Alm 157

L'Artaserse Music newly attributed to Antonio Cesti

ovvero L'Ormonda costante'
[ARTAXERXES, OR ORMOND THE CONSTANT]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)

 Elah-Gabal in the emperor's mother tongue.

79 Marco Faustini to the Grimani brothers, 15 Decembre 1667, transcribed in Rosand, Opera, p. 439. Teofilo Orgiani set G. B. Pocchettini's
revised version of Aureli's text for performance in Bologna in 1671. It was later revived at Sant' Angelo under the title // Vizio depresso e
la Virtit coronata (1686/10).

7 Probably not the same as the score possessed by Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613). The burla [mock battle] between gardeners
and court buffoons is transcribed in Alm, Winged Feet, pp. 258f.

 Said in the libretto to be distinguished in letters and arms. The earlier version of the libretto had been dedicated to Paolo Spinola. Perhaps
in error, the 1666 dedication is repeated verbatim in some reprints made for the 1668 performance and in Galvani (Zeatri, p. 86). Citations
here are based on the collection in US-LAu (here Alm 157).

73 By Herbert Seifert (La figura, p. 42), citing Cesti's own letter in the Harrach family archive (Vienna) of 13 Dicembre 1668. The second
work (by Beregan) mentioned in the same letter may have been // Genserico (1669/2).

% A list of fifteen libretti previously written by Aureli appears on the final page of libretto.

94 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

With balli SORTING DATE: 1668-12-30~

a) Dedicated to Gio. Carlo and Vincenzo Grimani, NN.VV.

This work was based on the sibling rivalry between the sons  Artaxerxes, the first-born, and Cyrus,
the second-born  of the Persian king Xerxes. The latter had a fiery temper and a great desire for power.
The work was set in Susa, the capital of the Persian Empire.

Oo The libretto for Artaserse was dedicated on 28 December 1668; the production is likely to have opened
by the 30th. It must have been well received because it was apparently one of the two works still running
four weeks later. In the opening scene, Stateira held a festa teatrale in which Caprice and Invention
performed a balletto in an amphitheater, while two of Artaxerxes' musicians appeared on an overhead
machine. This beginning was in character with the rest of the production, which boasted cori of ladies,
gentlemen, pages, standard-bearers, soldiers, eunuchs, slaves, and hunters.

A Score in I-Vnm

Listed as Galvani SSGP 45; Bonlini 113; Groppo 116; Alm 161

 1668a La moda; La verita raminga; I] disinganno [a trilogy]. Cf. Suppl. 8.

1669/1 L'Argia Music attributed to Antonio Cesti
[ARGEIA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Filippo Apolloni
M1 Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a prologue and balli SORTING DATE: 1669-01-19~
& Dedicated to Alessandro Contarini, N.V.

The action, which took place on Cyprus at an indeterminate ancient time, concerned the love of Selinus,
the son of King Athamantes who was raised by the king of Thrace, and Argeia, the daughter of the king
of Euboea.

Oo The original six-hour performance had been warmly received in Innsbruck, where it was given before
the exiled queen Christina of Sweden in November 1655. By 1669 it was something of a legend. The
libretto for this abridged Venetian revival was dedicated on 13 January 1669. The production, which
must have opened soon thereafter, was in progress on 26 January 1668 M.V. (GB-Lpro). Most of the
lavish cori of the Innsbruck work were omitted. A work with the same title was given in the small court
theater in Mantua in 1674."

fi Scores in I-Ne (2), Vlevi, Vnm*!
Listed as Galvani SSal 13; Bonlini 114; Groppo 117; Alm 162

5 One ballo depicted a brawl between corteggiani, a possible adaptation from the commedia dell arte fare of earlier times. Unusually for the
time, the choreographers (Lelio Bonetti and Angelo Frazzato) were identified in the libretto. They are said to have been both dancers (ballarini)
and painters.

76 Productions cited in GB-Lpro, SPV, Ser. 101, Box 83, letter of 26 Genaro 1668 M.V.
 The score possessed by Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613) was probably a separate one.
78 Contarini, a Venetian nobleman, was a procurator of San Marco.

 Francesco Nicolini, who wrote the dedication, asked readers not to judge the virtue of the work in its now abbreviated form. He also sought
to acknowledge the ancestry of the work to the creators of the much applauded Dori, a reference to the work by Cesti and Apolloni in Innsbruck
in 1655 and at San Salvatore in 1663 and 1667.

 Cited (from I-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 2806) in Besutti, La corte musicale, p. 91.

5! Facs. in IOB, 3. The ballo from Act Two [from the copy in I-VLevi] is shown in Alm, Winged Feet, p. 254. It is one of the few opera
balli of the time to be in a minor mode.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-9) 95

Z|
4

96 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1669/2 Il Genserico Music attributed to Antonio Cesti and Gian Domenico PartenioTM
[GENSERIC]
A melodramma Text attributed to Nicold Beregan
im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1669-02-04~
we Dedicated to Benedikte Henriette, Duchess of Brunswick
i) The plot concerned relations between the Goths and the Eastern Roman Empire upon the collapse of

the Western Roman Empire in the fifth century. Genseric [sometimes called Gaiseric], the king of the
Vandals and A fricans, was now called upon by Valentian's widow, Eudoxa/Eudossa, to ward offattacks
by the Huns. He also hoped to marry his son to her daughter.* As the work opened, Genseric had just
won a desert campaign and camels were seen on the stage. The libretto for Genserico was dedicated
on 31 January 1669 and the production should have opened shortly after the feast of Santa Maria Formosa
(Purification). Conflict with the Turks resulting in the fall of Candia (Crete) in December 1668 had
brought many northern allies to Venice to plot revenge (GB-Lpro), and the audience for this work should
have been substantial.

fi Scores in I-MOe, Vnm**
Listed as Galvani SSGP 46; Bonlini 115; Groppo 118; Alm 163

1669/3 Tiridate Music attributed to Giovanni Legrenzi*
[TiRIDATES]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Ippolito Bentivoglio
M1 Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1669-02-07~
& Dedicated to Andrea Vendramin, N.V.

In this plot from Armenian history, the Parthian prince Tiridates had been invited by the Romans to
invade Armenia. There he fell in love with Zenobia, the princess of Palmyra (modern Syria), who had
won great respect for her bravery. She was secretly married to the Armenian prince Rhadamisthos/
Radamisto, who was currently held captive by Tiridates. Rhadamisthos escaped too late to prevent

 Now believed to be mainly by Cesti (to whom it was once fully attributed) but completed by Partenio (Seifert, La figura, 43). Partenio
(c. 1650-1710), who later received a degree in theology, was born in Venice to a family said to be from Friuli (recent research by Gastone
Vio has diluted the connection). He later became a prominent figure at San Marco, where he served as vice maestro (from 1685) and then
as maestro di cappella (1692-1701). Partenio also composed sacred vocal music for the Ospedale de' Mendicanti.

* Granddaughter of James I of England, she was the youngest daughter of Prince Edward of the Palatinate (1652-1730). Her mother was the
Mantuan Anna Gonzaga. Her wedding to Johann Friedrich of Brunswick-Liineburg (with whom Beregan maintained a correspondence) had
taken place in 1668. This production of Argia could have been for her benefit. She was identified in the dedication as a descendant of the
Vandals.

* In 1728 Handel attempted to compose an opera on the same text (Olibrio or Genserico), but his now lost manuscript (HWV 2A) did not
progress beyond a draft for the opening scenes.

* In 438 AD the historical Genseric captured Carthage.
* A further score belonged in the early nineteenth century to Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

' Though he eventually became maestro di cappella at San Marco (1685-90), Legrenzi (1626-90) was peripatetic in the 1660s. His career
was promoted by members of the influential Bentivoglio family of Ferrara. His opera L 'Achille in Sciro (Venice, 1664; Suppl. 2a) was well
received. He provided sacred music for several noble families (Pallade veneta, passim) and held instrumental accademie in his home in the
1680s.

58 Adapted by Minato, who regretted in the libretto that the work had to be finished in a few days.

 The principal owner of the Teatro di San Salvatore.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1660-69) 97

Zenobia from throwing herself into the River Araxes (which divides modern Iran from Azerbaijan).
A sorceress then deceived him.

Oo The libretto was dedicated on 4 February 1668, which was apparently M.V., because the work would
have had a very short run in 1668."! The story (prone to many variations) was a popular one which
reappeared (with revisions) in Albinoni's Radamisto (1698/7) and Gasparini's L'amor tirannico
(1710/5). The work had first been presented in Ferrara (1665) as Zenobia e Radamisto. Nicold Minato
and Marc' Antonio Montealbano were now the putative impresari of San Salvatore, but Minato had
gone to Vienna before this work was produced. Both figures were cited in a notary's records of March
1669 for not having collected the box-rents. The claim against them was not settled until 1673.

fi Score in I-Nc; arias in GB-Lbl
Listed as Galvani SSal 12; Bonlini 112; Groppo 115; Alm 158

1669/4 L'Ermengarda, regina de' longobardi Music by Ant. Sartorio
[HERMENGARD, QUEEN OF THE LOMBARDS]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro DolfinTM
r1 Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo and esercizi cavallerschi SORTING DATE: 1669-12-26
& Dedicated to the Kind Reader
 Hermengard/Ermengarda, the first-born of the second marriage of Bertha, the countess of Arles, married

Adalbert, the marquis of Ivrea. Her political ambitions were challenged by her two brothers and her
step-brother. The action in this work took place in Pavia. Ermengarda had opened by 26 December
1669,' perhaps contrary to the wishes of the Council of Ten, which took steps to delay the official
opening of Carnival on account of the death of Pope Clement IX on 9 December. Four performances
had been given by 3 January.

@ Reports of the work's fortunes are contradictory. Dolfin anticipated on the 26th that the work should
have a good reception because of the sweetest music of Sartorio and the presence of my new
cantatrice, whom Francesco Maria Massi called a most beautiful sweet young singer (a bellissima

 In Bentivoglio's anachronistic plot, Tiridates was put on the Armenian throne by his brother Vologeses in 54 AD [the reign of Zenobia began
in 267]. In Venetian opera libretti, Rhadamisthos was variously Iberian or Armenian. (According to Tacitus, Rhadamisthos, the son of Pharasmenes,
the king of Iberia, was the nephew of Mithridates, the king of Armenia). The text for Handel's Radamisto (HWV 12a), usually attributed in
the main to Nicholas Haym, may also have debts to this work. The minor characters here are fictional ones.

! Shrove Tuesday fell on 5 March in 1669 and on 14 February in 1668. Legrenzi's presence in Venice can be confirmed for March 1668.
A production of this work may have been intended for the earlier year.

 Arnaldo Morelli (Legrenzi, p. 65) transcribes a letter from Legrenzi (dated Venezia, li 7 marzo 1668) to Bentivoglio, in which the composer
apologizes for having failed to find two books requested by his patron.

53 Numerous documents and inventories of the theater's contents under both Minato and his successor, Francesco Santurini, can be found in
I-Veg, Archivio Vendramin [AV], MS 42 F 6/2.

* Pietro Dolfin was a Venetian nobleman who was actively involved in affairs at SS. Giovanni e Paolo during Sartorio's stint at the court of
Brunswick.

%5 These exercises also included portrayals of other noblemen's pastimes, such as drawing lots with their swords.

6 Dolfin offered the dedication to Johann Friedrich, who declined it (Vavoulis, Massi, p. 567). Similarly, the Venetians wanted to host an
official welcome for Ernst August, but he declined it on the grounds that he was traveling incognito (Vavoulis, Joc. cit.).

 Opening date from Rosand, Opera, p. 440, citing Dolfin's letter of the same date (D-Hsa, Aktes-Korrespondenzen II, n. 625, f. 405). The
28th is given as the opening date in GB-Lpro.

8 GB-Lpro, SPV, Ser. 101, Box 83, letter of 28 December 1669, in which the agent noted that despite this wish, the theatro Grimani di S.
Gio. e Paolo had already opened.

 Vavoulis, Massi, p. 566.

98 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

giannetta cantatrice).' It was reported on 17 January 1669 M.V., however, that the work did not have
srand applause (GB-Lpro).!"!

Ermengarda opened with a raucous symphony of instruments, quite possibly indicating the use of
trumpets.' If this were the case, then Sartorio's recent exposure to musical practices at the court of
Brunswick could be considered the stimulus for increasing (perhaps introducing) the use of trumpets
in Venetian theater orchestras, an innovation which is generally dated from his Adelaide (1672/2).'

A No musical sources known'TM
Listed as Galvani SSGP 47; Bonlini 116; Groppo 119; Alm 167

 1669a Il natale de' fiori. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

' Rosand, Opera, p. 440, letter of 26 December 1669.

'! A note to the reader (19 January 1670) of the libretto for Marcello in Siracusa alluded favorably to the recent appearance of a Lombard
queen in the famous Grimani theater, saying that it had contributed to the valor and virtue of Venice's reputation among European literati.

' & strepitosa sinfonia di strumenti.

3 Both Roman and Teutonic subjects suggested the use of trumpets. In Cavalli's Scipione africano, a sinfonia of trumpets and violins played
before the curtain was raised (to show an amphitheater) and during the gladiatorial games which followed. Regarding Ermengarda, the adjective
strepitoso had been consistently used for decades to describe the straight trumpets used in processions.

'* Giovanni Rossi possessed a copy of the score in the early nineteenth century (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

The 1670s: An Overview

he 1670s brought a degree of stabilization to Ve-
2 netian opera. Its reputation grew on the Italian
peninsula, in the Hapsburg spheres, and in France.

The appearance of the Giornale veneto de' letterati, first
published in February 1671, demonstrates the growing
importance of academic societies in promoting dramas
enhanced by music. Coverage of Venetian opera in the
Mercure galant (established in 1672), which began in 1677,
confirmed its importance.

The four theaters active in the 1660s  SS. Giovanni
e Paolo, San Salvatore, San Cassiano, and San Moise 
functioned as they had in the 1660s. The first two maintained
more or less predictable schedules. San Salvatore was
reinvigorated by modifications in interior design and new
management. The second two alternated as comedy houses
in some years and opera houses in others. The theatrical
landscape was changed in the last years of the decade with
the opening of Sant' Angelo (1677), San Giovanni Grisosto-
mo (1678), and a theater at the Contarini villa, Piazzola
(1679). (See Table 20.) Sant' Angelo and San Giovanni were
to survive all their peers as opera houses. They presented
drammi per musica exclusively until 1748 and 1747. One
significant difference distinguished these two new houses.
San Giovanni was the most opulent opera house of its time
anywhere. It was planned to dazzle, to overwhelm.
Sant' Angelo, in contrast, was always a struggling enterprise
tottering on the margins of total collapse. Their contributions
to opera were vastly different. Yet their durability was rough-
ly comparable. Sant' Angelo proved to be more durable, for
it survived into the nineteenth century.

While the dynamics of opera production changed little
in the 1670s, the recognition given to academies influenced
the marginalia of opera. Military strategies of antiquity were
re-enacted in battle scenes. New habits of dress and manners
were exhibited in balli and cori. In the Venetian Republic
it was a calm time, a pause between its two greatest cam-
paigns of the century.

It was not a calm time in the rest of Europe. France was
at war with the Netherlands for most of the decade. In 1674
the Holy Roman Empire joined the Dutch in opposing the
French. A growing rift between the Empire and France was

to have far-reaching implications for Venetian opera. The
Turks gathered strength on land, winning the Polish Ukraine
by treaty (1676). The vast debts which the Venetians had
accumulated during their war in Crete were little discussed
but continued to seriously erode the economy.

Cavalli was well on in years by 1670 and was relatively
inactive in the theater during his last years. His successors
at San Salvatore, Antonio Boretti and Antonio Sartorio, both
died young (possibly of overwork) before the decade was
ended. Giovanni Legrenzi was a notable newcomer. At SS.
Giovanni e Paolo, Pietr' Andrea Ziani was active until his
departure for the Chapel Royal at Naples in 1676. Carlo
Pallavicino, who already had ties to the Saxon court in Dres-
den, enjoyed a growing reputation in Venice and composed
some of the most arresting works given at San Giovanni
Grisostomo in its first years. Several operas were also staged
at the academic Teatro ai Saloni, where the academicians
themselves performed. The public was invited to attend
without charge. Most works given there had previously been
produced, often on a lavish scale, in Vienna (Suppl. 7).

No sooner had the new theaters opened than they were
upstaged by the entertainments of the doge's own family,
for in 1679 the first of several monumental productions was
given at the villa of the Contarini family at Piazzola, twenty
kilometers from Venice. The theater was the enterprise of
the doge's son Marco and it was he who was mainly
responsible for assembling what we know today as the
Contarini Codices, preserved in the Marciana National
Library in Venice. It is the largest surviving collection of
scores of Venetian opera. Operas given at Piazzola (a much
smaller number of works) were performed before an invited
noble audience. They were interactive: noblemen partici-
pated as extras on horseback and as machinery
engineers. In the eyes of the nobility of northern Italy, this
adventure, though brief, cannot have failed to dim the luster
of the works given indoors at the new theaters in the city.

The schedule of productions changed in the 1670s.
Openings in the first half of December continued steadily
in the first years of the decade, but the government intro-
duced measures to keep the theaters closed throughout the
liturgical season of Advent. Productions after Christmas

100 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

25
20 | 0 Sant'Angelo |
| | |O San Cassiano
15 | | @ San Gio. Grisostomo
10 lO SS.Gio.e Paolo |
| | TM San Moise
5 | @ San Salvatore
| @ Other
0 ST
1665 1675
FIGURE 20, Comparison of theatrical activity in the 1660s and 1670s. (In this and subsequent tables, the middle
year of the decade is used for identification.)

became more common. The government attempted to keep Of the 55 operas believed to have been performed in
the Carnival contained by opening it with an official decree the 1670s, thirty-eight (almost 70 per cent) are survived by
at a variable date, usually in January. The dates were not a musical score. All are survived by printed libretti.
revealed in advance. Carnival generally opened about a Documentation is scarce for the middle years of the decades
month before Shrove Tuesday. but becomes abundant from 1676 onward.

The 1670s: Chronology

Marcello in Siracusa Music by Giovanni Antonio Boretti

[MARCELLUS IN SYRACUSE]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
V1 Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1670-01-19
a Dedicated to Octavius of Taxis!

The Roman captain Marcellus was charged with capturing the walled seaport of Syracuse, which was
occupied by the Greeks. After considering available methods of land and sea attack, he built wooden
piers under the town wall to facilitate an assault. The Greeks' defense rested on Archimedes' design
for a concave mirror to focus solar rays onto wooden objects (such as Marcellus's ships and the newly
built piers) until they ignited. The Romans won, but Marcellus's plea to spare Archimedes' life was
ignored. Roman troops assassinated the scientist in his study, amid an array ofhis scientific instruments.

OR This revival (the work had first been given at SS. Giovanni e Paolo in 1660) is reported to have opened
to great applause on 19 January (GB-Lpro). The production fell apart on the second night because the
prima donna was sick. Someone less well prepared was substituted.? The work's reception was also
undermined by a paucity of foreign visitors. P. A. Ziani organized a production in Naples in 1673, and
the work was performed in numerous locales in northern Italy over the next several years.

Baron of the Holy Roman Empire, Taxis (1621-91) was the imperial postmaster for the Venice-Trent route, which led to Austria. His forebears
had developed the first imperial postal routes in the fifteenth century. The baron and the marquis Ornano were implicated in a scandal in Venice
two years later (see the letter from Nicolo Beregan of 1 Aprile 1672 in Vavoulis, Massi, p. 575).

? Noris credited Plutarch and Macrolichus with his tuition on the subject.
3 GB-Lpro, SPV, Ser. 101, Box 83, letter of 25 Gennaro 1670.

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 101

A Score in I-Vnm
Listed as Galvani SSGP 48; Bonlini 118; Groppo 121; Alm 170

1670/2 L'Antigona delusa da Alceste Music by Pietr' Andrea Ziani
[ANTIGONE DELUDED BY ALCESTIS]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli*
im Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a prologue and balli SORTING DATE: 1670-01-20
& Dedicated to Antonio Teodoro Trivolzio

Alcestis, hearing that her husband Admetos, the king of Thessaly, was incurably ill, offered to sacrifice
herself for him. Admetos survived, but then discovered that his wife was gone. Princess Antigone, who
also loved Admetos, trapped him by adopting a male disguise, revealing her identity, and then castigating
him for his infidelity. In this revival (the work was originally given in 1660-61') much of the effort
seems to have been invested in incidental pieces  especially the prologue for six allegorical figures,
among which Music reigns supreme, and the coro for the Twelve Hours of the Day.

Ooo- The libretto for this revival was dedicated on 18 January 1669; the title-page is dated MDCLX. Aureli's
text was a source for Handel's Admeto, re di Tessaglia (HWV 22, 1727). Abbot Domenico Federici
reported to the empress on 8 February 1670 that the work at San Salvatore contained nothing beautiful
except the music, in which Ziani has captured all the good things [he has learned in] Vienna. It is not
so much a drama as a musical Iliad.

A Score (1660) in I-Vnm
Listed as Galvani SSal 14; Bonlini 117; Groppo 120; Alm 168, 169

1670/3 L'Erismena Music by Francesco Cavalli
[ERISMENA]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
I] Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Carnival (Fat Week)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1670-02-13
a Dedicated to Don Gasparo de Teves y Cordova'

Erismena, the daughter of an illicit union between the Median prince Erymanthos/Erimantes and the
Armenian princess Arminda, stood to inherit the throne if her true identity could be established." She
first appeared here disguised as a gentleman and was subsequently wounded in combat. Her lover, the
Iberian prince Hydraspes/Idraspe, was believed to be a follower of Erymanthos. His adopted sister
Aldimira, with whom Erismena's father was in love, was a slave. As the work opened, the Medians
had just defeated the Armenians.

*On 13 December 1669 Massi had appealed to Johann Friedrich on behalf of Aureli's desperate circumstances, which he attributed to poverty
and illness (see the transcription in Rosand, Opera, p. 440).

5 One ballo was for cavalieri di varie nazioni. Stage ensembles representing various nations were a staple of both French and Venetian
opera that can be traced back at least as far as Cavalli's Gli amori d'Apollo e di Dafni (1640). In some cases, the dancers could not agree on
the gestures, since they reflected different styles of dance (see Alm, Winged Feet, p. 259).

 A count of the Holy Roman Empire and a member of the Order of the Golden Fleece.

7 The original production is usually cited for 1660; the libretto for 1670/2 says it was gia novi anni since the earlier one.
 This number may have inspired a similar stage effect in Legrenzi's Germanico (1676/1).

 Ferretti, Musica politica, p. 451.

" Still imperial ambassador to Venice.

" The kingdom of the Medes lay south of the Caspian Sea, between Armenia and Persia. Erymanthos was also a river god of the Arcadians.

102

fi

 1670a
 1670b

1670/4

v1

o

1670/5

mM

es
Of

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

For this revival of the work first given at Sant' Apollinare (1655), the libretto dedication date of 13
February 1670 (Giovedi Grasso) must specify the modern year, because in 1671 Lent began on 11
February. It must also have been the opening night, because Francesco Maria Massi, the agent of the
duke of Brunswick, and Ernst August attended a performance on that date.'?

Scores (2) in I-Vnm

Listed as Galvani SSal 15; Bonlini 119; Groppo 122; Alm 171

L' Adelaide, regia principessa di Susa. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Untitled serenata. Cf. Suppl. Sa.

La Semiramide Music attributed to Pietr' Andrea Ziani
[SEMIRAMIS]

A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Andrea Moniglia'?
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1670-12-12

Dedicated to the brothers Gio. Carlo and Vincenzo Grimani

The Assyrian queen Semiramis exploited the fact that she and her son Ninias" were of strikingly similar
appearance. Unlike his late father Ninus, who founded a dynasty, Ninias proved incompetent at leading
an army. Creon/Creonte, the king of Babylonia, thinking the son an easy target, encountered the disguised
and much more bellicose Semiramis. The work, set in Susa, involved numerous groups of soldiers and
warriors.'* In one ballo, Moorish soldiers used their swords to spell out a poetic message.

The libretto for Semiramide was dedicated on 11 December 1670. The performance was in progress
onthe 12th.'* Although it was apparently intended to run into January (the title-page is dated MDCLXXD),
Semiramide was not well received. According to one account, it was still open on 19 December but
only because of a couple of exquisite singers.''A revival of La Dori (1670/6) was given when the
theater reopened on the 26th.

Scores in D-AN, I-Vnm'
Listed as Galvani SSGP 49; Bonlini 121; Groppo 124; Alm 173

L'Ercole in Tebe Music attributed to Giovanni Antonio Boretti
[HERCULES IN THEBES]

A dramma per musica Text by Gio. Andrea Moniglia, rev. Aurelio Aureli
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1670-12-13~

Dedicated to Alessandro Molin, N.V.

Among the many victories of Hercules/Ercole, that over Creon was noteworthy, as were his exploits
in Thebes. In this account amorous entanglements complicated military plans. Some of the action took

 Vavoulis, Massi, p. 567.
'> Revisions attributed to Matteo Noris. The text was originally written [as Semirami] and set to music by Cesti, for the wedding of the Tyrolean
archduke Sigismund Franz, whose unexpected death in 1665 precluded such a celebration.

' The name of Semiramis's son (here Nino) is rendered in many different ways in the broad range of opera libretti based on tales from her
life. This text alludes to both the father and the son as Nino. To separate these identities, I have used Ninias to designate the son.

'S A staging of Moniglia's text planned for San Cassiano in 1666 had been shelved in favor of a (re)production of Cavalli's Giasone.
6 Vavoulis, Massi, p. 570.
'7 See Rosand, Opera, pp. 440f.

'S A score also belonged to Giovanni Rossi in the early nineteenth century (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

1670/6

1671/1

mM

&

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 103

place in the Underworld." The libretto for Ercole was dedicated on 12 December 1670 and is likely
to have opened before the 15th; it was still running on the 19th. Cieccolino [Antonio Rivani] had
arrived on 7 November for rehearsals but then had demanded an increase in his fee from 250 to 300
dobble. Other singers included Vicentino [Vincenzo Olivicciano] and Mutio. (The latter, while
said to be miscast as Hercules, was praised for his singing). It was noted that Vicentino captures great
honor.! One ballo was for infernal spirits in various forms.

Abbot Federici consigned the score to Count Waldstein on 31 January 1671 in order to have it conveyed
to the court at Vienna. He suggests that it contained annotations of his own. In retrospect, he allowed
that Boretti (whom he claimed was a convert from Judaism) was an applauded composer but listed
as his chief defects his having married and his having composed ugly music for Dario (1671/2).
On the night of 4 January 1671(when the production would have resumed), the nobleman Giovanni
Mocenigo mortally wounded Nicole Foscarini in his box at San Salvatore. Mocenigo was later hung
in the standard manner (between the columns of Sts. Mark and Theodore near the ducal palace) for
his crime.

Score in I-Vnm; arias in I-Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSal 16; Bonlini 122; Groppo 125; Alm 174, 175

La Dori ovvero Lo schiavo reggio Music attributed to Antonio Cesti
[DorI, OR THE ROYAL SLAVE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Filippo Apolloni
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1670-12-26
Without dedication

This revival of 1667/1, which opened on 26 December 1670, was a temporary replacement for the
unsuccessful Semiramide (1670/4) while anew work [Eraclio, 1671/1] was in preparation. First given
in Innsbruck in 1657, La Dori had been produced to great acclaim at San Salvatore in 1663.

Scores (1657) in A-Wn;?> D-MUs; GB-Lbl; I-MOe, Vnm; arias in I-Ne, I-Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSGP 50; Bonlini 123; Groppo 126; Alm 176

L'Eraclio Music attributed to Pietr' Andrea Ziani
[HERACLIUS]

A melodramma Text attributed to Nicold Beregan
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1671-01-19~

Dedicated to Ernst August, Prince of Brunswick-Liineburg'

' Moniglia's text was written as a festa teatrale for the wedding of Prince Cosimo III de' Medici to Marguerite Louise d' Orleans (Florence,
1661; see Galvani, Teatri, p. 87).

2 Vavoulis, Massi, p. 570.

2! Correspondence transcribed in Rosand, Opera, pp. 409f. Mutio is unidentified.

?? Ferretti, Musica politica, pp. 454f.

3 Amelot de la Houssaie, Histoire, pp. 195f. The date appears to be new-style.
4 Facs. edn. in IOB, 6.
25 Facs. edn. in IOB, 63.

26 Ernst August (1629-98), the brother of Johann Friedrich, married the Palatine princess Sophia (1630-1714), who is cited in the text of the
dedication, in 1658. He served as the protestant bishop of Osnabriick from 1661, later becoming duke (1679) and elector (1692) of Hanover.
It was through the lineage of his wife, as the granddaughter of James I, that the British crown passed in 1714 to their first-born son, Georg

Ludwig (George I).

104

O-

1671/2

fi

 1671a
 1671b

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

In this derivation from Pierre Corneille, after the tyranny of the Eastern Roman Emperor Phocas [602-
610] and the imprisonment of his predecessor Maurice [582-602], Heraclius [610-641] defended
Byzantium against A fricans. The staging was particularly rich in grotesque scenes involving cadavers
and caves, which were sharply contrasted with the splendors (indoors and out) of imperial Constantinople.
The libretto was dedicated on 17 January 1671 and must have opened soon thereafter. The production
was still in progress on 6 February. L 'Eraclio was also produced in Naples in December 1673. It was
reported that Eraclio was so beautiful one can never have enough of it and that [Beregan] is deified
in this theater...he is unequaled in invention and ingenuity.

Scores in I-Nc, Vnm* arias in I-Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSGP 51; Bonlini 124; Groppo 127; Alm 177

Dario in Babilonia Music attributed to Giovanni Antonio Boretti
[DaRIUS IN BABYLON]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Beverini*!
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1671-01-26

Dedicated to Lorenzo Tiepolo, N.V.

The plot was based on the efforts of Darius I (sixth century BC) to recapture Babylon (Mesopotamia).
The work opened with the Assyrians attacking the Persians at the wall of the city. The libretto for Dario
was dedicated on 24 January 1671 and the production must have opened within the next few days.
However, it had closed by the 31st, according to a letter from Abbot Federici to the Viennese court.
Federici claimed that Dario contained ugly music, was good for nothing, and was buried as soon
as it was born. Perhaps anticipating criticism, Beverini wrote in his preface that he did the best he
could to accommodate the work to the needs of the stage.

Massi had sent Duke Johann Friedrich a list of singers for the winter which included Giulia Masotti,
Lucrezia del Dolfin, Vincenzo [Olivicciani] from Florence, Giuseppino [Giuseppe Maria Donati] from
Bavaria, Alessandro from Livorno/Leghorn, the tenor Biancucci, and the bass [Ippolito] Fusari** No
theater was specified, but the first three named had prior associations with San Salvatore. Johann Friedrich
had boxes for the season in San Salvatore, SS. Giovanni e Paolo, and San Samuele.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SSal 17; Bonlini 125; Groppo 128; Alm 178

Iphide greca. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Serenata (untitled). Cf. Suppl. Sa.

2 The dramas of Pierre Corneille (1606-84) exerted tremendous influence over Venetian opera libretti from the 1670s. Via derivations by
numerous librettists, notably including Metastasio, this influence carried through the end of the eighteenth century.

*8 Letter of that date from Massi, transcribed in Rosand, Opera, p. 441. On the 16th Massi sent six copies of the libretto to Duke Johann Friedrich
(Vavoulis, Massi, p. 571).

 Loe. cit.

% Giovanni Rossi possessed a score for this work (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

3! Beverini was a Venetian. This was his only known opera libretto.

* A Venetian nobleman.

% Ferretti,

Musica politica, pp. 454f.

4 Vavoulis, Massi, p. 569.

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 105

1671/3 Claudio Cesare Music by Giovanni Antonio Boretti
[CLAUDIUS CAESAR]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
i Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1671-12-14~
a Dedicated to Johann Friedrich, Duke of Brunswick-Liineburg

In this story from Tacitus, Claudius succeeded his late wife, Messalina, to serve as emperor [41-54
AD]. He married his niece Agrippina who, by a previous marriage, was the mother of Nero. A rebellion
occurred after he petitioned the Senate to deviate from Rome's legal traditions by allowing this marriage
to his niece.** Aureli pleaded in his note to the reader for tolerance towards the dramatic weaknesses
of the work. He explained that it has more canzoni and ariette than incidents [i.e., more musical numbers
than dramatic scenes]. It should suffice to say that it is a dramma per musica. What can one do if today
the caprices of Venice demand it? I give them what they want. To claim to conquer the heart is rash.
To be blessed with universal acclaim is a stroke of luck.

O The surviving libretto for this work was dedicated on 27 December 1672, but the correct year is now
believed to have been 1671, with a run extending into January 1672.** It appears, in fact, that Claudio
Cesare was the work which had opened at San Salvatore before the 17th, and therefore it probably
opened not later than the 14th. The second ballo recreated a gladiatorial battle. Although no singers
can be firmly associated with this work, Antonio Cavagna was a lodger in one of the dedicatee's houses
during the winter of 1671/2.%

A Scores in I-Nc, Vnm
Listed as Galvani SSal 18; Bonlini 128; Groppo 131; Alm 181

1671/4 Caligola delirante' Music by Giovanni Maria Pagliardi"
[CALIGULA IN DELIRIUM]
A melodramma in musica Text attributed to Domenico Gisberti
rd Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1671-12-26
& Dedicated to Johann Friedrich and Ernst August, Duke and Prince of Brunswick-Liineburg

Gaius Caligula, the son of Germanicus, succeeded Tiberius as emperor of Rome in 37 AD. Under the
spell of a love potion, he became embarrassingly entangled with an alluring Moroccan named
Adraspe, who was really Tigranes, the disguised king of Mauritania and a prisoner of Artabanos.
Separate balli featured painters and madmen.

*5 Recently appointed maestro di cappella to the newly elected duke of Parma.
* Aureli explains that many changes were made after the work went into rehearsal.

57 Tj presento il mio Claudio ricco pili di canzoni, e d'ariette, che d'accidenti. Basti il dire, che sia drama per musica. Che si puo fare? S'oggi
di i capricci di Venetia cosi la vogliono, io procuro d'incontrar il lor gusto. Il pretender di colpire nel segno, e temerita. II sortire l'applauso
universale, e fortuna. Aureli also explained that many changes were made after the work went into rehearsal.

** The preface says that Boretti had recently been given an appointment by the duke of Parma, but he did not take up the new position (as vice

maestro di cappella) until April 1672. See Bianconi,  Ercole', passim.

* I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, Segn. 41, entry of 17 Decmbre 1671: Si e dato principio alla recita dell'opera in musica nel teatro di San
Salvatore...

 Vavoulis, Massi, p. 574. The dedicatee was himself preoccupied with the Dutch-French war, for much of the fighting was in the vicinity
of his duchy.

*! Pagliardi (1637-1702) served principally as maestro di cappella to the Grand Duke of Tuscany from 1672. Caligola was his first opera.

 The text seems to have originated in 1660 as an opera in stile recitativo called La pazzia in trono, overo Caligola delirante for the production
at Sant' Apollinare and later published in Ghisberti's Talia (Munich, 1675). It appears that only the prologue and a few numbers were set to
music. According to Groppo (No. 81), the music was by Cavalli.

106

1672/1

oO)

1672/2

r1

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Caligola had opened by (and apparently on) 26 December 1671 (I-Rvat A).''' This libretto was dated
18 December 1672, an apparent error, since in 1672 there would have been a collision with Boretti's
Domiziano (1672/4). The title-page was dated 1672. With various revisions including the addition and
subtraction of roles, Caligola had thirteen other productions through 1696. Most fell between the current
one and 1680/10, which was given at SS. Giovanni e Paolo. Caligola and Massenzio (see 1673/1) were
both performed (as commedie) before Christina of Sweden at the Tordinona in Rome in 1674." It also
had an academic prototype in La pazzia in trono (Suppl. 7, 1660), a spoken play with arias by Cavalli.

The upcoming season was said to be attracting a large crowd of foreigners, including (prospectively)
the prince of Monaco (see 1672/1) and many gentlemen from Genoa and Milan (I-Rvat A).'! The skills
of Pagliardi and the exquisiteness of the singers were both praised in the libretto.

Scores in D-MUs, I-Vnm; arias in GB-Lbl; I-Nc (both Naples, 1673) and Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSGP 52; Bonlini 127; Groppo 130; Alm 180

Attila Music attributed to Pietr' Andrea Ziani
[ATTILA]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1672-02-12

Dedicated to the Prince and Princess Grimaldi of Monaco*

The story related here concerned the three-sided conflict between the Vandals, Romans, and Franks
in the fifth-century environs of Aquileia. The perspective was that of Honoria, the sister of the emperor
Valentinian [d. 454], who, with her husband Torrismond, fled to avoid the wrath of Attila. In this
adaptation of Corneille's like-named play (1667), the leader of the Vandals imprisoned Theodoric, the
ruler of ancient Belgia* and most of Gaul.

The date of dedication of the libretto, 12 February 1672, must be new-style; the printer's date is
MDCLXXII (Carnival lasted until 1 March in 1672 but only until 14 February in 1673). The arrival
of the prince of Monaco was signaled in a notice of the opening of Caligola, the preceding work at
SS. Giovanni e Paolo. Trumpets, still a rarity in Venetian theaters,*' were used in the opening sinfonia
to accompany the march of the Vandal army and in the first (bellicose) ballo. Following the model of
Archimedes' study in Marcello in Siracusa [1670/1], the final scene of Attila was set in the rooms of
Philisthenes, where many astrological [sic] instruments were seen.*

Score in I-Bbor, Vnm; arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSGP 53; Bonlini 129; Groppo 132; Alm 182

L' Adelaide Music by Antonio Sartorio
[ADELAIDE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Pietro Dolfin
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1672-02-19

* Kirkendale, Court Musicians, p. 442f. Buffo roles for Nesbo and Gelsa were added to Caligola.

* A copy of the score also belonged to Giovanni Rossi (cited I-Vnm, Cod. It. VI-1613).

5 Apparently Luigi I Grimaldi (1642-1701) and Catherine-Charlotte de Gramont. They were also the duke and duchess of Valentinosa.

 This ancient kingdom of the late Roman period was substantial in size but not significantly coincident with modern Belgium.

7 See the commentary on Ermengarda (1669/4).

* The casting for the work is unknown, but Ziani took with him to Naples in November of the following year a soprano named Caterina Porri
and a castrato nicknamed Mocenigo (Vavoulis, Massi, p. 587).

* A copy of the score belonged to Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 107

& Dedicated to Johann Friedrich, Duke of Brunswick-Liineburg

Oo Dolfin's story, an invented one set in Pavia in the tenth century, was based on historical figures 
Adalbert, the only son of Berengar, the ruler of Milan and second king of Italy; Adelaide, the widow
of Lothar/Lotario; and her companion Otto, who was not recognized because of his disguise. In a nod
to Teutonic culture, the balli depicted such subjects as miners and prison guards. The date of dedication
of the libretto, 19 February 1672, has to have been new-style; the same date in 1673 would have fallen
during Lent. The content was significantly changed from the academic work of 1670 (Suppl. 7). Elements
of the story survive in Handel's Lotario (HWV 26, 1729).

 Adelaide is often cited as the first Venetian opera in which trumpets were used. While it is plausible
that Sartorio introduced them, they could have been used in previous works such as Sartorio's
Ermengarda (1669/4, also on a text by Dolfin) and were present in Ziani's Attila (1672/1), which was
running concurrently. They may have symbolized the primitive culture of the Vandals more than the
glory of present-day rulers.

A Scores in D-HVI (aut.), Mbs; I-Vnm*!

Listed as Galvani SSal 19; Bonlini 130; Groppo 133; Alm 183

 1672a La campagna della regina. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1672/3 L'Orfeo" Music by Antonio Sartorio
[ORPHEUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
im Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1672-12-14
& Dedicated to Gio. Battista Cornaro dalla Piscopia

The celebrated legend of Orpheus, son of Calliope and Apollo, and his tragic love for the Thracian nymph
Euridice had been the subject of Monteverdi's like-named work for Mantua (1607). This account included
many of the legendary episodes, among them the amorous interest of Aristaios, in flight from whom
the nymph suffered a mortal snake-bite. The work opened with the wedding of Orpheus and ended with
the arrival of the sea goddess Tethys on the beach of Thrace.

Oo L'Orfeo had been performed twice by 16 December 1672 (I-Rvat A). The dedication was dated 14
December 1672. The last performance was on 20 January 1673, when audiences were distressed to
learn that the production was closing.TM P. A. Ziani mounted a revival of the work in Naples in 1682.

* The story is unrelated to that of Adelaide, regia principessa di Susa, given in 1670 for the academy that met at the Teatro ai Saloni (Suppl.
7). The text for the new work may have been the one sent by Dolfin to Johann Friedrich on 19 Decembre 1670 (see Vavoulis, Massi. p.
571).

5' Facs, in IOB, 8. Some numbers of Adelaide were also refashioned to create the Cantata di Gissella (Gissella unica figlia) preserved in D-Mbs
(reported by Beth Glixon in NGDMM/2). See Dolfin's letter of 6 June 1672 concerning some cantatas derived from L 'Adelaide (Vavoulis,
Massi, p. 574).

* Sartorio appears to have been in ill health when he set this text. He was supposed to return to Hanover after the completion of Adelaide (1672/2)
but on 10 June, when a contract was offered for Orfeo, he begged Johann Friedrich to permit him to remain in Venice (Vavoulis, Massi,
p. 577).

5 In addition to being a procurator of San Marco, G. B. Cornaro was also the father of Elena Lucrezia Cornelia Cornaro dalla Piscopia (1646-84),
later celebrated as the first Venetian woman to receive a /aurea from the University of Padua (1678). Her uncommon skills in astronomy,
mathematics, and seven languages were highly esteemed. A member of the Accademia degl'Infecundi, she eventually became a Benedictine
nun. Aureli's dedication here, referring to the intellectual achievements of the Cornaro family, may obliquely acknowledge her growing renown.

* Dates from Massi's letter of 16 December 1672 and Dolfin's of 20 January 1673, transcribed in Rosand, Opera, pp. 441, 443. Orfeo was
labeled an autumn work on the title-page of the libretto. The title-page is dated 1673.

108 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

() The singing of the Roman Tonina Coresi (Euridice) and an unnamed baritone were praised, together
with Sartorio's music, by Pietro Dolfin, who was less enthusiastic about the costumes and scenery.
He described the work as very galant, more pastoral than heroic, and reported a huge (vastosissima)
attendance. Massi had described Coresi's voice as marvelous and exquisite in his letter of 16
December. Another singer, Giulia Masotti (La Dori), was more noted for her style.* The performance
may have included music for harp. Massi was having one built in November 1672.' The player of such
an instrument, Benedetto di Carli, had been hired at San Marco in 1669,** and the harp was mentioned
as an alternative to the theorbo in one of the trio sonatas of Agostino Guerrieri (Venice, 1673).

A Scores in A-Wn; I-Ne (1682), Vnm;* arias in B-Bc; D-HVs; GB-Lbl; I-Nc, Rvat, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSal 20; Bonlini 131; Groppo 134; Alm 184

1672/4 Domiziano Music attributed to Giovanni Antonio Boretti
[DoMITIAN]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
MM Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1672-12-30
a Dedicated to Henrichetta Adelaide, Electress of Bavaria!
ic) Domitian [81-96AD], according to the preface, was the most ruthless and lascivious of the Roman

emperors. The interest here is focused on Emilia, the wife of Domitian's general Appius, and her admirer
Florus. The libretto for Domiziano was dated 27 December 1672. Rehearsals were in progress by the
17th (I-Rvat A). Boretti died on the 29th (reportedly of exhaustion), which was said to be prior to the
opening of the work. The opening nonetheless was reported to have taken place by the 30th.

 The cast included Giulia [Masotti], who had brought her sweetness and tenderness to the theater by
9 December, and Cieccolino [Antonio Rivani], who had not yet arrived by that date. The cast also
included the little castrato Lassi but it lacked Lucrezia [del Dolfin], who had declined to sing in it,
and another (unnamed) pillar of previous seasons.* The Grimani brothers reportedly lost 3,000 on
this production. Audiences found the works at San Salvatore [Orfeo, 1672/3 and Massenzio, 1673/1]
more attractive. The Grimani cause was not helped by the fact that one of the male singers (unnamed)
was shot and killed while in a gondola with several other musicians.TM

55 Rosand, Opera, pp. 226, 441f (letter of 23 December 1672).

56 For Massi's letter of 16 December see Rosand, Opera, p. 441. Masotti was in the service of the Austrian princess Claudia Felicitas (Seifert,
Oper, p. 364).

*? Vavoulis, Massi, p. 578.

8 Selfridge-Field, Venetian Instrumental Music, p. 302.

* Facs. edn. with commentary by Ellen Rosand in DMY, vi.

 Several of the sources cited here and in for other works by Sartorio are newly reported by Vavoulis, Sartorio.

! The princess of Savoy by birth, the duchess of Bavaria by marriage. I-Rvat A (Segn. 41, entry of 26 Decembre 1671) notes the arrival in
Venice of the prince of Munich [probably here meaning the elector, Ferdinand Maria, of Bavaria] and numerous luminaries from Milan
and Genoa, which could easily be a description of the duchess's entourage.

 Rosand, Opera, p. 442 (transcription of Massi's letter of 30 December 1672).

 Massi, letter of 9 December 1672, transcribed in Rosand, Opera, p. 441. Rivani's presence is only confirmed in Massi's letter of 8 Gennaro
1673 (op. cit., p. 443). The singer traveled from Austria, where the emperor would have preferred that he stay longer. Rivani had been active
in Vienna under Ziani in the 1660s, went to England and France in c. 1670 and petitioned the Hapsburg court to match his wages abroad as
a condition of his return in October 1670 (Ferretti, Musica politica, p. 454). Dolfin was engaged in Rome (Vavoulis, Massi, p. 579).

 Massi, letter of 10 February 1673, transcribed in Rosand, Opera, p. 444.

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 109

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 54; Bonlini 132; Groppo 135; Alm 186, 187%

1672/5 La costanza trionfante Music by Gian Domenico Partenio
[CONSTANCY TRIUMPHANT]
A dramma per musica Text by Cristoforo Ivanovich
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1672-12-30~
is) Dedicated to Jean Antoine de Mesmes, Count d'Avaux

The Egyptian king Belos had two sons  Danaos and Aigyptos/Egito  to whom he gave the lands
of Egypt and Arabia respectively. In this plot, Lynceus/Linceo, the son of Aigyptos, fell in love with
Hypermnestra/Ipermestra, the daughter of Danaos. She saved him from the fate that her many sisters
inflicted on his many brothers.

O@ Francesco Maria Massi, the agent of the duke of Brunswick, indicates that La costanza had opened
by 30 December 1672 and was still running on 20 January. Galvani, Bonlini, and Groppo all list the
work for spring 1673. GB-Lpro says that it had opened as the terza by 7 January 1673.! Lacostanza
was the first work to be given at San Moise since 1667. The libretto is the earliest in this study to offer
aprinted cast list. The singers were Carlo Lesma (Danao), Teresa Balsami (Jpermestra), Zannetto Carletti
(Linceo), Orsola Parmeni (Elmira), Bastianino Rosa (Arbante), Pietro Corte (Delmiro, Arsace), Sebastiano
Orfei (Barce), and Tonino Cola (Vafrino). The libretto also names the ballet-master (Bortolo Gorbissa),
the scenery-engineer (Stefano Santurini), the set-painter (Domenico Mauro), and the costume-maker
(Tomaso Zanoli). According to Massi, the work had little to recommend it, but the theater was still
enjoying full audiences on 20 January 1673.

 La ccostanza proved so popular, according to Massi's letters of 8 and 13 January 1673, that its abundant
attendance was hurting other theaters. Its success owed in part to the fact that no charge was being levied
at the entrance except for those who did not hold boxes. Box-holders automatically received four
complimentary bollettini (tickets of admission). A diplomatic report explains that this arrangement
resulted from the fact that the French ambassador [i.e., the dedicatee] had offered the theater a generous
gift, enabling the producers to avoid any investment of their own.

 Giovanni Rossi possessed a copy in the early nineteenth century (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

 The preliminary materials (including even the frontispieces) in these two libretti are substantially different. The dedication of the second
(No. 187) praises the Elector Georg Ferdinand Maria as the Hercules of Germany.

 Under the pseudonym Urbano Sirena. Possible sources for the story include Horace's Odes 3:11 and Ovid's Heroides 14. Ivanovich, a Dalmatian
priest, was a canon at San Marco and an early chronicler of Venetian opera (see his Memorie teatrali and Minerva al tavolina).

 French ambassador to the Venetian Republic.
 Letters of 30 Decembre 1672 and 20 January 1672 [M.V.], transcribed in Rosand, Opera, pp. 442f.

* The contradiction may relate to a disagreement between Bonlini, who says that the spring work was previously given elsewhere, and Ivanovich,
who, as the author of the text, was mute on the subject in Minerva al tavolina. The lack of a personal name in the title is characteristic of texts
which had been recycled.

7! Terza here must mean the third of the season among all the theaters, although if the doddering production of Domiziano is included, this
would have been the fourth work to open. A recent note in GB-Lpro SPV, Ser. 101, Box 82 suggests [erroneously] that the letter of 7 January
1673 represents the year 1674. (Despite the fact that Britain did not adopt the new calendar until 1752, dispatches from Venice appear to be
dated consistently in the Roman style!)

 Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 79). The comment that it was given with la solita generosita accademica is presumed to mean that no entrance fee
was charged.

3 Massi's letters of 8 and 13 January 1673 and of 30 December 1672, transcribed in Rosand, Opera, pp. 443, 442.

74 Si e dato principio alla terza opera, che si fa in questo teatro di S. Moise daalcuni signori particolari, senz' alcuna spesa, et il drama intitolato
la Costanza trionfante e stato dedicato a questo Signor Ambasciatore di Francia, che I'ha riconosciuto con generoso regalo (GB-Lpro, SPV,
Ser. 101, Box 83, entry of 7 Gennaro 1673, with pencil correction of modern vintage reading =1674).

110 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SMoi 13; Bonlini 134; Groppo 137; Alm 189

1673/1 Massenzio Music attributed to Antonio Sartorio
[MASSENTIUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Giacomo Francesco Bussani
i Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1673-01-28
a Dedicated to Almor6 Dolfin and Marin Zorzi, NN.VV.
Oo The tyrannical Maxentius was influenced by a wizard of the praetorian guard. His magic deceived many

and paved the way for the accession of Licinius, the brother-in-law of Constantine. The romantic interests
of the plot were invented. Although expected to open on 24 January 1673, Massenzio's premiere was
on the 28th. Audiences found the work admirable and considered the music to be most beautiful
and most marvelous. Nicola Gratianini (Gratianino) was singled out for his performance in the
title role in a cast noted for its exquisiteness. Antonio Rivani (Cieccolino) won praise in the
supporting role. The work brought immortal fame to Johann Friedrich [through the participation of
members of his court], while Dolfin found an unnamed virtuosa in the service of Leonardo Loredan
to be insufferable in a supporting role.

OR Cavalli had been asked to set the text, but the plan was scuttled by managers impatient with a lack of
spirited ariettas in the provisional work, according to Pietro Dolfin. Sartorio obliged them with a
work containing 78 arias and duets, which was said to have been composed in thirteen days, even
though he had turned down an opportunity to compose for SS. Giovanni e Paolo in November and had
recently declared himself too unwell to return to Hanover.

fi Arias in F-Pn; I-Ne; S-Uu (aut.);! arias in D-HVs; F-Pn; I-Nc, Vqs; S-Uu
Listed as Galvani SSal 21; Bonlini 133; Groppo 136"; Alm 188

1673/2 Lisimaco Music by Giovanni Maria Pagliardi
[LYsIMACHOS]
A dramma per musica Text by Cristoforo Ivanovich
im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1673-12-12~
is) Dedicated to Giovanni Michieli, N.V.TM

*5 Don Giacomo Francesco Bussani was a canon at the Venetian monastery of the Carita.

76 These noblemen, as the husbands of the sisters Francesca and Maria Loredan, were the sons-in-law of the procurator Leonardo Loredan.
Zorzi eventually became a member of the Riformatori dello Studio di Padova. Members of the Dolfin family were also prominent in the
government.

7 Pietro Dolfin, letter of 20 January and Massi, letter of 27 January 1673 (Rosand, Opera, pp. 444, 443; the latter also cited in Vavoulis, Massi,
p. 583).

78 Dolfin, letters of 3 Febraro and 20 Gennaro (Rosand, oc. cit.); Vavoulis, Massi, p. 583.
 Pietro Dolfin, letter 3 February 1673 transcribed in Rosand, Opera, p. 443.

 Vavoulis, Massi, pp. 579f.

5! No remnants of Cavalli's setting survive.

 Erroneously given as 137 by Groppo.

* Pagliardi's involvement was precipitated, it seems, by Pietr' Andrea Ziani's departure for Naples, which was reported on 3 November 1673.
Ziani took with him the soprano Caterina Porri and the castrato Mocenigo (Vavoulis, Massi, p. 587).

*  like-named person married Adrianna Grimani (b. 1667), the youngest sister of Giovanni Carlo and Vincenzo Grimani.

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 111

Antigonos, the king of Phrygia, entered Egypt with the intention of marrying his daughter, Berenice,
to Ptolemy/Tolomeo. She, however, fell in love with the Cappadocian prince Cleanthes. Ptolemy's
loss of ground benefitted Lysimachos, the king of Thrace [323-281 BC].* The libretto, which attributed
the story to the escapades of the gods of War, Love, and Fortune, alluded to the many accomplishments
of the dramatist and composer in portraying the greatest [heroes] of the age in which the story was
situated. Since Ivanovich regarded the story as well known, several of the grand personages cited
were not actually present in the drama.

 The libretto for Lisimaco was dedicated on 10 December 1673. The production is likely to have opened
soon and to have continued after Christmas (Ivanovich said he intended the work for performance during
the coming Carnival). The title-page is dated M.DC.LXXIV [1674], but the genesis of the text was
earlier: Ivanovich had written to Pagliardi on 26 June to announce that it had been selected by the theater
for production. Preparations, including external repairs to the theater, had begun by 20 October.

) Enthusiastic comments preceded the arrival of the singer Orsola [Parmeni] from Rome. She was said
to be beautiful and socially adept. She had black eyes and was always smiling. She could probably upstage
another Roman singer, Zitellotta. In addition she could speak, sing, narrate, and act with skill. She
was also described as being as cunning as a devil.** The role of Berenice was apparently taken by
Lucia Cimini (that miraculous virtuosa), to whom an anonymous laudatory sonnet survives.

A Scores in I-MOe, Vnm; arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSGP 55; Bonlini 135; Groppo 138; Alm 190
 1673a Il Lippa, ovvero El Pantalon burlao. Cf. Suppl. 3.
 1673b Private concert at the palace of Marquis Guido Rangoni. Cf. Suppl. Sa.
 1673c Private concert by two sopranos. Cf. Suppl. Sa.
 1673d La regia pescatrice. Cf. Suppl. 7.
1674/1 La schiava fortunata Music by Antonio Cesti, rev. Marc' Antonio Ziani
y
[THE FORTUNATE SLAVE]
A dramma per musica Text by Gio. Andrea Moniglia, rev. Giulio Cesare Corradi
Md Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1674-01-13~
a Dedicated to Alessandro Contarini, N.V., Procurator of S. Marco!

5 Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 79) claimed the drama had been given previously in Vienna and Parma.

8 Relevant correspondence between Pagliardi and Ivanovich is transcribed in Kirkendale, Court Musicians, pp. 424-426 (one letter is also
transcribed in Rosand, Opera, pp. 430ff). Ivanovich offers a famous story with heroic actions. He has varied the meter of the arias and gives
Pagliardi jurisdiction over the musical treatment, including the number of arias to be set with sinfonie, which shall be determined by the
constraints of time. He recommends that the music be accommodated to the skills of the singers, a list of whom will be sent. Pagliardi expresses
great admiration for the work and the scope for variety it offers but has not received the list of the singers and is working blind.

7 Massi, letter of 20 Ottobre 1673 in Rosand, Opera, p. 444.

8 Francesco Massi's letter of 20 Ottobre 1673 (transcribed in Rosand, Opera, p. 444) also indicates that Marquis Rangoni found her extremely
captivating, much to the dismay of his wife.

 The score in I-MOe, although on Ivanovich's text, contains a musical setting by Bernardo Pasquini and matches a score in D-Wd. The composer
of a third setting of the work (Turin, 1681) has not been identified (Kirkendale, Court Musicians, p. 424).

 The younger Ziani (c. 1653-1715) was a central figure in musical relations between Venice and Vienna. In 1686 he was named maestro
di cappella to the duke of Mantua, but he was a peripatetic figure who spent much of his time in Venice until, in 1700, he was named vice
Kapellmeister at the imperial court. In 1712 he was elected full Kapel/meister.

' Contarini was elected a procurator in 1668. He was the dedicatee of Argia (1669/1).

112



1674/2

fi

 1674a
1674/3

mM

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

In his first involvement in Venetian opera, Marc' Antonio Ziani, the nephew of Pietr' Andrea, revised
Cesti's score of La Semiramide, overo La schiava fortunata (Vienna, 1667) to create this work. The
libretto, dedicated on 1 January 1674, professes that many elements of the script were altered to produce
modern universal pleasure. This was an unusually lackluster year for Venetian theaters. San Salvatore
was undergoing renovation, and there was little else to draw visitors. The production of La schiava
cannot have opened earlier than 4 January; it is more likely to have begun around the 13th, roughly
a month before the end of Carnival.

Scores in I-MOe, Vnm (inc.); arias in -MOceTM
Listed as Galvani SMoi 14; Bonlini 136; Groppo 139; Alm 192, 193

Numa Pompilio Music by Giovanni Maria Pagliardi
[NuMaA PomPILIus]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1674-01-13~

Dedicated to Almore Dolfin

Raised as a shepherd, Numa Pompilius became the king of the Romans after the death of Romulus.
Although he was supposed to marry Claudia, the most beautiful woman in Rome, he fell in love with
the nymph Hegeria and, according to legend, married her. The libretto for Numa Pompilio (also given
in Vienna in 1674) was dedicated on 11 January 1674, and the production should have begun soon after.
Scores in A-Wn; I-Vnm

Listed as Galvani SSGP 56; Bonlini 137; Groppo 140; Alm 194

L'Epulone. Cf. Suppl. 8.

L'Almerico in Cipro Music by Antonio Dal Gaudio
[ALMERIC IN CYPRUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Girolamo Castelli*
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1674-12-01~

Dedicated to Alessandro Contarini, N.V.

Eager to find a wife who would be the most beautiful in the world, Almeric, the king of Cyprus, sent
ambassadors abroad to search for such a creature. Two princesses from Rhodes  Rosena and Laodikeia
made the short list. Because of rough seas, the latter did not arrive until after the decision was made.
L'Almerico opened after 30 November (the date of dedication of the libretto) but before 15 December
1674 (GB-Lpro). The work ended with a theater of Glory. The composer's beautiful harmonies
were praised in the libretto.

 This set a path for the rest of Ziani's life. Intermittently active in Mantua in the 1680s and 90s, his final years (1700-1716) were spent as
Kapellmeister at the imperial court. The story of Semiramide as related by Moniglia had been set by Ziani's uncle, Pietr' Andrea, for SS. Giovanni

e Paolo as 1670/4.

%3 Alm (erroneously) gives the dedication date as 11 January; this is an isolated case in an almost flawless work.

* The aria in US-Wle associated with this title is from Fioravanti's Fabbro parigino, ossia La schiava fortunata.

5 Son-in-law of the late procurator Leonardo Loredan.

6 Giovanni Rossi possessed a copy of the score (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

57 Dal Gaudio, a Roman cavalier, was in the service of Gian Francesco Gonzaga, the duke of Sabbionetta.

%8 This is the only known libretto by Castelli, a Venetian.

 Now identified as an imperial procurator of San Marco.

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 113

fi Scores in I-Nc, Vnm'?
Listed as Galvani SMoi 15; Bonlini 138; Groppo 141; Alm 195

1674/4 Diocleziano' Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[DIOCLETIAN]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1674-12-11
& Dedicated to Diana de Tiange, Duchess of Nevers''
Oo In this tale of imperial Rome, the emperor Diocletian, who was victorious in many battles, returned

triumphantly to Rome to celebrate the incarceration of the Persian king Narses and the wedding of his
own daughter, Valeria, to the duke Galerius. Diocleziano opened on 11 December 1674 (GB-Lpro);'
its libretto was dedicated on the 10th. Owing to his lengthy stay in Dresden, Pallavicino had not composed
an opera for Venice in seven years. This work was well received and attended (GB-Lpro). Among its
highlights were anonymous musico cast as a generic castrato to represent the musical practice of the
East and a ballo (the second) for Persian prisoners whose feet were chained.

fi Scores in I-MOe, I-Vnm;' arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSGP 57; Bonlini 139; Groppo 142; Alm 196, 197

1674/5 Eteocle e Polinice' Music by Giovanni Legrenzi
[ETEOCLES AND POLYNEICES]
A dramma per musica Text usually attributed to Tebaldo Fattorini'TM
MM Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1674-12-13
& Dedicated to the Ladies of Venice

Eteocles and Polyneices/Polinesso, the sons of Ulysses, decided after their father's death to rule Thebes
in annual alternation. When the first proved unwilling to yield the throne, the second sailed to Argos,
where Adrastos offered him the hand of his daughter, Argeia, and a promise to help him regain his
kingdom.

Or This appears to be the work which opened on 13 December 1674 (GB-Lpro). It was to have four revivals,
the last in 1690. Like Diocleziano, Eteocle was well attended and well received (GB-Lpro). A note
to the reader of the libretto terms Legrenzi's music incomparable for its beauty [vaghezza] and mentions
the contribution of Gio. Battista Lambranzi's scene to an overall sense of the masterful. Among the
singers was a certain Maddalena, who was hosted by the marquis Guido Rangoni in the Palazzo Bragadin
(parish of Santa Marina).'

 The success of this work must have been gratifying for the Vendramin (the owners of San Salvatore),
who had entertained thoughts of letting it for ten years to the impresario Francesco Bembo for the

 Facs. edn. with commentary by Giovanni Morelli in DMV, vii.

'" The wife of Filippo Giuliano (Mazarin) Mancini. See Enea in Italia (1675/1).

' Series 101, Box 83, entry of 15. Xbre [dicembre]1674.

'93 4 score also belonged to Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

' But sometimes attributed to Leonardo Loredan, N.V. (cf. Galvani, / teatri, p. 89, and Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 81).

'5 The singer (who may have been Maria Maddalena Musi, although in later years she was associated with SS. Giovanni e Paolo) was still
in Venice on 7 March 1675, when she was accompanied by the wife of Giovanni Molin at a festa di cavallo (I-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia,
Busta 1576, letters from Gio. Francesco Ferrari dated 17 9bre [novembre] 1674 and 9 Marzo 1675). Musi's singing career peaked in the 1690s.

114

fi

 1675a
1675/1

rd

fi

 1675b
 1675

1675/2

mM

a
)

'6 Vavoulis, Massi,

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

production of comedies.' Adapting the text to the opera stage was, however, ruinous, according to
Fattorini's note in the libretto. The number of scenes (24 in Act One and 26 each in Acts Two and Three)
is notable. There were 90 arias, but most were short and musically simple.

Scores in F-Pn;' I-MOe, Nc; arias in B-Bc; GB-Och; I-MOe, Nc, Tn, Vnm, Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSal 22; Bonlini 141; Groppo 144; Alm 199, 200

Dario ravvivato. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Enea in Italia Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[AENEAS IN ITALY]

A dramma per musica Text by Giacomo Francesco Bussani
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With a battle and balli SORTING DATE: 1675-12-04~

Dedicated to Filippo Giuliano Mazarin Mancini, Duke of Nevers

The Trojan prince Aeneas, the son of Venus and lover of the Latin maiden Lavinia, was confronted
by Camilla and a tribe of Amazons. After the prince's son, Ascanius, fell in love with Camilla, his
enchanted Sword of Beauty became the weapon of his own destruction. The production featured a dance
of the Cyclops and a chorus of Sirens.

Enea seems to be the only new opera for which Dolfin could have sent a libretto to Johann Friedrich
on 2 December 1675! and the only opera which could have been closing at SS. Giovanni e Paolo around
23 January 1676 (GB-Lpro).' Curiously, however, no new works seem to have opened at any Venetian
theater during the preceding January or February. Enea was also produced in Genoa (1676) and Naples
(1677). A like-named work by Minato (set by Draghi with contributions by Leopold I) was performed
in Vienna (Neustadt) in 1678.

Scores in I-Vnm (2);'" arias in I-Ne

Listed as Galvani SSGP 58; Bonlini 142; Groppo 145; Alm 201, 202
La gara degli dei. Cf. Suppl. 5b.

Private concert for the prince of Denmark. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

La divisione del mondo Music by Giovanni Legrenzi
[THE DIVISION OF THE UNIVERSE]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi"!
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1675-12-06~

Dedicated to the Venetian nobility

In this mythological tale of creation, Jupiter, breaking loose from the chains of Saturn, took control
of the Heavens. The Earth was then divided between Neptune and Pluto, who ruled the Sea and the

 p. 585 (letter of April 1673). Of course, comedies were usually produced at San Salvatore theater in the autumn.

' Facs. edn. in DMV, vi.

'8 Vavoulis, Massi,

 p, 593.

' A work dedicated to the patron's wife (Diane de Tiange) had opened earlier (see 1674/4), and because both works were set by Pallavicino
and given at the same theater, one would expect them to have been performed closer in time. Taken together, these considerations allow for
the possibility that Enea was first given in January 1675 but had a revival in December of the same year. However, no hint ofan earlier production
of Enea has been found. The duke of Nevers was related to the duke of Mantua, who was in Venice from 17 December (GB-Lpro).

"0 4 score also belonged to Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

' Corradi's employer, the marquis Guido Rangoni, became the director of San Salvatore in 1675. Excluding his remake of La schiava fortunata,
this stunning allegorical work marked his Venetian debut. He developed a taste for military dramas highlighting the reigns of ancient tyrants.

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 115

Underworld. The libretto for La divisione was dedicated on 4 December 1675. The first performance
must have occurred almost immediately, because Adone in Cipro (1675/4) was in production by the
19th and probably opened sooner. The lack of documentation for an extensive run, in light of many
accounts of its lavish staging, gives the impression of a celebratory court spectacle, produced once,'
instead of a dramma per musica performed on successive evenings for several weeks. Its purpose in
that role would have been to inaugurate the newly redesigned theater. Whatever the number of
performances, the size of the audience was clearly stupendous, for reports are legion.

7-500) Reports of the staging of La divisione, Legrenzi's first opera for Venice in seven years, are legion. In
Saint- Didier's account, the Four Elements opened into the palaces of Love (Amore) and Discord, but
these were themselves transformed into the Temple of Mars, which was surrounded by weapons of
war. He regarded it as the most entertaining sight I ever saw upon astage." Rangoni had completely
renovated the theater.'"* Corradi praised the sweetness of Legrenzi's harmonious notes and said that
his music drama would impart a melody of Paradise. Bonlini said that the work was admired for the
pure breadth of conception of the machines and scenery.!"> Riccoboni still recalled the work and its
spectacular staging in 1738. Other distinctions of La divisione were its great number of arias (90'")
and its eight cori.

t) In a review in verse, members of the cast of La divisione were identified by nicknames. Fabbri has
decoded them as Maddalenina del Rospigliosi (Giunone); Catina Foresti (Apollo); Antonio Rivani
(Cicolino; Giove); Caterina Angiola Botteghi'"' from Florence (Venere); Ippolito Fusari (Pluto);
Francesco Lotti from Lucca (Amore); Pietro Paolo [Scandalibene?] from Cremona (Discordia); Antonio
Fontana (Formenti; Saturn); Lucrezia del Dolfin (Cintia); and Alessandro (Lissandro) Moscanera
(Marte). The impressions made by the singers are described in verse, scene-by-scene.'!

A Scores (2) in F-Pn; arias in GB-Och; I-MOe, Nc, Rvat, Tn, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSal 23; Bonlini 143; Groppo 146; Alm 203

1675/3 Medea in Atene Music attributed to Antonio Giannettini
[MEDEA IN ATHENS]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
i Performed at San Moise SEASON: Advent (Novena)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1675-12-17
& Dedicated to Alessandro Contarini, N.V.
Oo In Greek mythology, the magician Medea fled from Corinth to Athens after killing the bride of the

unfaithful Jason and her own children. Taking refuge in the palace of the Attic king Aigeos/Egeo, she
later attempted to poison the prince Theseus. The work included five cori and had a role for a speaking

"? Perhaps, for example, to inaugurate Guido Rangoni's management of the theater.
"8 Saint-Didier, La Ville, quoted in Nagler, Source Book, pp. 267f. Discord is cited as Imeneo; no such allegorical role exists in the work.

"4 Rangoni's wife, Vittoria, was a member of the Bentivoglio family, with whom Legrenzi had earlier been associated in Ferrara.

'1S_ | fu ammirabile per la vastissima idea delle machine, ed apparenze, che l'hanno accompagnato in scena, essendo stato quest'anno Direttor

del Teatro il Marchese Guido Rangoni (Bonlini, Le Glorie, pp. 81f.).
"6 See Dubowy, Legrenzi, p. 462.

" Her nickname, Centoventi, referred (according to Fabbri, Recensione, p. 436) to her outlandish salary requests (i.e. for 120 soldi). Bonlini
(Le glorie, p. 183) tells us that the expression cento vinti had, by 1720, passed into proverbial use for any well-paid singer, although the
amount was by then absurdly small.) The Florentine Botteghi offers the first documented instance of a performer who appeared in both operas
and comedies: in 1673 she had played in a comedy at the Teatro Tordinona in Rome. There is at least one contemporary case of a triple career
 as singer, comica, and prostitute: the Roman comedienne Giulia de Caro served in all three capacities in the 1670s (see Maione et al., The
Commedia...in Naples, passim).

"'8 Fabbri, Recensione, pp. 435-466, gives numerous excerpts of the text (after -FAN MSS Federici n. 226, 1). Two Roman members of the
cast  Giuseppe di Fede and Bastianello  are not clearly identifiable.

116

1675/4

r

 1675

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

cadaver. First performed on 17 December 1675 (Gb-Lpro),!' Medea was to have revivals in Venice
(1678/1) and, with the title Teseo in Atene, in Parma (1688).

Score in I-Vnm; arias in -MOe, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SMoi 16; Bonlini 144; Groppo 147; Alm 204

Adone in Cipro Music attributed to Giovanni Legrenzi
[ADONIS ON CYPRUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Matteo Giannini'
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Advent (Novena)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1675-12-19

Dedicated to Cesare and Alessandro Calimero!!

The text, based on Ovid's account of Venus and Adonis, departs from its model to concentrate on the
jealousy of the Cypriot princess Dorisbe. The work opened with a chorus of instrumentalists and
nymphs in the atrium of the palace of Amore, where a banquet was in progress. On the frontispiece
of the libretto, these figures were seated with four male figures on the left and four female figures on
the right. Books that appear to contain music lay open in the foreground. A sinfonia di stromenti followed
the song of two nymphs.

Adone was reportedly first performed in Venice on 19 December 1675 (Gb-Lpro).' All three versions
of the libretto were dedicated (by Francesco Nicolini) on the preceding day.' St. Stephen's openings
were necessarily avoided in 1675-1676 because of the papal jubilee, which kept the theaters closed
from 26 December until 8 January (GB-Lpro).

The libretto suggests that Giannini's text was originally composed for Vienna. In Venice it was at first
rejected by the censors.'* The present work included anonymous changes attributed without authority
to Giannini. The differences between US-LAu 215 and the other libretti cited here are substantial. This
version has a long and somewhat caustic dedicatory preface! plus an elaborate list of supernumerary
parts (for nymphs and shepherds, the Three Graces, attendants, warriors, soldiers, hunters, demons,
tritons who play instruments, and sirens who sing). It says that operas are not composed for those who
pluck feathers'** nor for idiots who row boats or weigh caviar.

Arias in I-MOe, Ne, Re, Rvat, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSal 24; Bonlini 145; Groppo 148; Alm 206, 207, 215

Santa Catterina d' Alessandria. Cf. Suppl. 8.

' A license to print the libretto, which was dedicated on the 14th, had been issued on the 1 0th. The probable reason for openings in the Novena
in 1675 was that a jubilee was to start after Christmas. The theaters would therefore be closed for two weeks from that date.

" Dott. Giannini was from Modena; his involvements with opera were few. The Venetian Tebaldo Fattorini is credited with revising this libretto,
and Galvani (Zeatri, p. 89) maintains that little of Giannini's text survives.

"! The Calimero were gentlemen (cavalieri) from Brescia.

'? Guido Rangoni must surely have won a reprieve from the authorities to open the production during the Novena of Christmas. It was an
exceptional occurrence.

"It would appear that the work grew with each reprinting and that the dedication was simply copied from one version to the next. For example,
the number of scenes in each act became steadily larger. Act Two became much more substantial.

'* Dubowy, Legrenzi, p. 457. The situation was well known to librettists; see Galvani's listing for Adone (his Appendix 2, No. 24), p. 165.

"5 Written by Ignatio Teomagnini to the virtuous and dispassionate reader, it refers to the corrector of the print, those who presume to
be masters but are not scholars, and the fact that poetic style is not valued in Venice as much as writing verbosely.

6 1 iterally piciagaioli.

1676/1

1676/2

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 117

Germanico sul Reno Music by Giovanni Legrenzi
[GERMANICUS ON THE RHINE]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and a giuoco SORTING DATE: 1676-01-28

Dedicated to Luigi Grimaldi'?'

At the height of the military leadership of Germanicus, the Roman Empire had flourishing provinces
between the Elbe and Rhine Rivers, with capitals in Cologne (for the northern province) and Mainz
(for the southern). The story related here, adapted from Tacitus and concerned with the excessive brutality
of the Germanic tribal leaders Arminius and Segestes,'* took place in Cologne and culminated in the
coronation of Germanicus. (Arminius later ambushed several legions, and the Romans were forced
to withdraw to the left bank of the Rhine.)

Germanico was first performed on 28 January 1676 (Gb-Lpro).' The libretto had been dedicated the
preceding day. Germanico opened with an elaborate introduzione. A chorus of Hours, Days, Months,
and Years was assembled in the Palace of Time.'* Military Glory and Eternity flanked Time, which
was a globe of the Earth. Altogether there were eleven individual roles, nine choruses of mute
characters, and a specter of Orpheus. Among the incidental items were a ballo for [medieval] tribal
soldiers and a game (giuoco) for gladiators.

At its opening Germanico was received with full satisfaction.'*' Legrenzi was praised in the libretto
for providing unmatched variety and bizzarria. The agent reporting to the British resident in Venice
wrote that, The author [Corradi], having dedicated his work to the prince of Monaco, has been
generously recognized by him with a gold neck-chain of great value. (One week earlier the same agent
had written that the work would be sponsored by the Marquis Rangoni.) The cast included the soprano
Antonio Coresi and the tenor Giovanni Morselli.'* Between 1677 and 1680 Germanico was produced
in Milan, Reggio, Bologna, and Forli.

Score in I-MOe (probably from Modena, 1677); arias in B-Bc; I-MOe, Nc, Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSal 25; Bonlini 147; Groppo 150; Alm 211

Gallieno Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[GALLIENUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1676-02-03~

Dedicated to Gio. Giacomo Farsetti, N.V.

The Roman emperor Gallienus [254-268 AD] fought battles on the Danube and the Rhine, where he
triumphed over the Goths. This account concerns his campaign in North Africa and shows his military
efforts to have been undermined by his susceptibility to amorous adventures. It was anticipated that
Gallieno would open by 31 January 1676 (Gb-Lpro), but since the 3 1st and 1 February were prohibited

"8 Ancient Belgica was much larger than the modern nation of Belgium. At its maximum extent it included parts of what are now northwest
France and Western Germany.

' The celebration of the universal jubilee (dated 27 Dicembre 1676 to 10 Gennaro 1677 in I-MOe A) caused the closing of all theaters and
gambling houses over that period.

'0 4 Dance of the Hours had been used in Ziani's Antigona (1670), which was also given at San Salvatore.
'3! GB-Lpro, SPV, Series 101, Box 87, letters of primo Febraro and 25 Gennaro 1676.

'2 Vavoulis, Massi, p. 595.

118 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

dates for theatrical activities, Gallieno is more likely to have opened after this short hiatus. Its libretto
had been dedicated on 23 December 1675. Gallieno had revivals in Naples (1685) and Milan (1687).

Ow One of the singers appears to have been Tomaso Boni, whose return to Mantua was arranged in April
1676.'% Dubowy notes that this work includes relatively few arias (15 of 78) with instrumental
accompaniment.'* This may be partially explained by a prefatory note to Act One of the libretto, which
states that the curtain rises without the usual concert of instruments. [Instead] a vast plain appears
under a dark night sky. The work is full of other lugubrious scenes  a horrible cave in the first
act, an inferno of lovers in the second, and tombs in the third.

A Scores in A-Wn; D-DIb (inc.); I-Vnm, Ne"; I-arias in I-MOe, Rvat, Vqs'*
Listed as Galvani SSGP 59; B 146; G 149; A 208, 209, 210

1676/3 Leonida in Tegea Music by Antonio Draghi; rev. attributed to M. A. Ziani'
[LEONIDAS IN TEGEA]
A dramma per musica Text by Nicold Minato
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1676-02-09~
@ Dedicated to Gio. Battista Strozzi'**
Oo The action here took place on the Peloponnesian peninsula, where Leonidas, a fifth-century king of

Sparta, and his wife Almira were unable to recognize one another because of the disguises they had
assumed. The libretto for the Venetian version of this work was dedicated on 9 February 1676. It had
been performed in Vienna (where Draghi was then the maestro of the chapel of Eleonora Gonzaga,
the empress) on 9 June 1670 for the birthday of Leopold I. An unusual feature of the music (probably
taken from the Viennese exemplar) was its scoring for six-part strings.'*

fi Scores in A-Wn (1670);'* I-Vnm; arias in I-Vc, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SMoi 17; Bonlini 148; Groppo 151; Alm 212

1676/4 Giocasta, regina d'ArmeniaTM' Music attributed to Antonio Cesti"?
[IOCASTE, QUEEN OF ARMENIA]

A dramma per musica Text by Gio. Andrea Moniglia, rev. Giacomo Castoreo

rd Performed at San Moise SEASON: Advent (Novena)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1676-12-17

'3 See I-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1576, letter of Gio. Carlo Grimani dated 12 Aprile 1676.
'4 Dubowy, Legrenzi, p. 469.
'35 Giovanni Rossi possessed a copy of the score in the early nineteenth century (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

'6 The score in I-Vnm lacks sinfonie. The Neapolitan MS (I-Nc 32.2.8) is dated 7 February 1683. The Vatican source is reported in Dubowy,
who also notes that in comparison to one another, these musical sources are highly divergent.

'57 Draghi (d. 1708) was associated from 1658 with the Austrian court. He served as Kapellmeister from 1682.
'8 The Strozzi family, from Florence, included several important military figures of the mid-seventeenth century.

' Normally the instrumental items were for three, four, or five ensemble instruments and basso continuo. It was common for ritornelli only
to be cued in by blank staves but not actually written out in scores. Sinfonias were given in their entirety. The usage here may suggest the
preferences of the court at Vienna if not also the involvement of musicians from that court in the performance.

"9 Fasc. edn. in IOB, 64.
| The words Regina d'Armenia in the title were provided by the printer.

' The work was planned for performance in Vienna in 1667. Carlo Grossi, who added arias to suit Venetian theaters, according to Moniglia,
is recorded as the composer in most modern works. Seifert has set the record straight (La figura, 43f). Galvani (Zeatri, p. 60) was essentially
correct in saying that the text was originally set by Cesti, but he died before his version could be produced.

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 119

& Dedicated to Catterina Bernardi Valiera'

Oo Iocaste/Giocasta, the queen of Armenia, was secretly admired by Kyrenes/Cirene, the king of Assyria,
whose attempts to keep her captive failed. Disguised as a warrior, she escaped. Giocasta opened on
17 December 1676 (Gb-Lpro).' The original libretto (US-LAu 213) was dedicated on the preceding
day by Francesco Nicolini. A license to print it was issued on the 13th.'* The production seems to have
re-opened as soon as the papal jubilee (observed between 27 December and 10 January 1677) was
concluded (NV). An adaptation of the text by Stefano Benedetto Pallavicino (the composer's son)
provided the basis for J. H. Wilderer's score (Diisseldorf, 1696).' The work was considered by the
Mercure galant to have been a very great success and to have been full of accomplishments. The
scenery was superior, the machines admirable, the music perfect, and the performance
marvelous.'* One ballo was for painters.

fi Arias in I-MOe, Nc, Vlevi, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SMoi 18; Bonlini 149; Groppo 152; Alm 213, 214

1676/5 Astiage Music by Giovanni Bonaventura Viviani'*
[ASTYAGES]
A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Filippo Apolloni
Md Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Advent (Novena)
With a battle scene and balli SORTING DATE: 1676-12-23
rs) Dedicated to Alvise Contarini, N.V.'
Oo Astyages, the king of the Medes, was defeated by Cyrus, the founder of the Persian Empire, in 550

BC. The story related here, which can be traced to Herodotus, was also treated in Sheherazade.' It
was the theater's first opera of the season, preceding Torila.'*' Although it was expected to open shortly
after Giulio Cesare (1676/6), its first performance took place on 23 December 1676 (NV).'* The libretto
had been given with anonymous music at the Teatro Tordinona, Rome, in 1673.'%

OE According to the Mercure, the composition of Astiage was marvelous and the performance was
undertaken by the leading musicians (/e premiers musiciens) of Europe. The work opened with a

'% Several male members of the Valier family were centrally involved in later campaigns against the Turks and were included in the Athenian
expedition of 1687/88. The learned Moniglia had been a Reader in Philosophy at Pisa and the principal physician of the Grand Duke of Tuscany.

4 The peculiar date is again attributed to the forthcoming fifteen-day jubilee.

5 The libretto for a revised version (US-LAu 214), involving at least one cast change, was dedicated on 6 January 1676 [M.V,].
'46 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 524.

7 The full text of the Mercure's account for most works of this season is given in Selfridge-Field, Pallade veneta, pp. 338-340.
8 Viviani was serving as Kapellmeister to the Emperor in Innsbruck.

' Elected doge on 26 August 1676.

'8 Sheherazade (popularized in the English-speaking work as The Arabian Nights and The Thousand and One Nights) was not well known
in Europe until after 1704, when a French diplomat in Constantinople (Antoine Galland), published his collection of folkloric tales. Kabbani
(Imperial Fictions, p. 24) notes the many other routes by which individual tales may have entered Europe, as this account demonstrates. She
acknowledges the interdependent relationship between Ariosto's Orlando furioso (some of the stories were known in Italy by the sixteenth
century) and the frame tale of the Arabian Nights.

'S! Here following the account of 26 Xbre [Dicembre] 1676 in I-MOas A, concerning both Astiage and Totila, The Mercure galant (Aout 1677,
pp. 37-53) has the sequence reversed, with Astiage the second opera and Totila the first. The Italian avviso is unlikely to be in error on this
point, since reports were circulated by the week. Some of the Mercure's summary reports appeared months, or even years, after the events
described took place (see Selfridge-Field, Addison, and Another Plagiarism, forthcoming). In the Mercure account the third work discussed
was Nicomede, the fourth /ocaste, the fifth Jules Cesar, and the sixth Antonin et Pompejan. The seventh and eighth were not attended by the
reporter. The ninth was Le Ravissement d'Helene.

' This unusual intrusion into the Novena of Christmas is said to have anticipated an impending jubilee (observed between 27 December 1676
and 10 January 1677).

83 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 115.

120 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

fire dance (danse pyrrique). Members of both sexes figured among the excellent players of instruments.

All received a wage in excess of 400 pistoles for the Carnival season. High salaries were said to be

a lure to singers with the most beautiful voices and an incentive to promote musical perfection.
fi Arias in I-Mc, Nc, Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSGP 60; Bonlini 150; Groppo 153; Alm 216

1676/6 Giulio Cesare in Egitto Music by Antonio Sartorio'**
[JULIUS CAESAR IN EGYPT]
A dramma per musica Text by Giacomo Francesco Bussani
I Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1676-12-26
& Dedicated to Mademoiselle Grace Higgins'

The conflict between Caesar's Rome and Cleopatra's Egypt in the first century BC provided the
background of this drama.'* Since Caesar led the Roman conquest into England, the choice ofan English
dedicatee here does not seem accidental.

XO) As the first opera of the season at San Salvatore, Giulio Cesare immediately preceded Antonino e
Pompeiano. A license to print the libretto was issued on 13 December 1676,'*' the libretto was dedicated
on the 17th, and an opening was anticipated by the 19th. However, the actual premiere was on the 26th
(NV), despite the fact that it fell on the cusp of the papal jubilee. The Aodit 1677 issue of Le Mercure
noted that the work was sung by the most excellent voices and that the production overall was no
less applauded than that of Antonino e Pompeiano by the same authors.'** Dolfin considered the work
superior and commended the performance of Margherita Pia (Rossina).'

o The fact that the dedicatee was English allows for the possibility that Bussani's interest in this tale was
inspired by Shakespeare's tragedy. This may account for its attraction to Handel, whose debts to Sartorio
in his work of the same title (HWV 17, 1724) have been discussed by Monson.' Bussani's text had
echoes in 1735/7, 1744/6, and 1746/8.

A Score in I-Ne; arias in CH-Zz; D-SUN; I-MOe, Nc, Rvat, Vqs; S-B, Sm
Listed as Galvani SSal 26 Bonlini 151 Groppo 154 Alm 217, 218

'S4 Sartorio had been appointed vice maestro di cappella at San Marco on 7 May 1676. He died in 1680.

'S5 Given in the libretto as Grasiggons and identified as the daughter of Thomas Iggons. Higgins was a special envoy from Great Britain
to Venice. The dedicatee is also identified in the preface as the niece of the duke of Albemarle. George Monck, the first duke of Albemarle,
was governor of Scotland and served briefly under Oliver Cromwell. He later played a role in the restoration under Charles II (1660). The
text could perhaps have been intended to infer a correspondence between Caesar's conquest of England in antiquity and Monck's reclamation
of it in recent times. Higgins complained to the ear! of Bath (14 April 1676) that gondoliers had treated the duke of Mantua rudely when he
visited the French ambassador in Venice (GB-Ob, MS Don B8, pp. 66-68).

'S Shakespeare's own account may have been given as the inaugural work at the Globe Theater, London (on the summer solstice, 12 June
on the Julian calendar) in 1599. See Sohmer, Mystery Play, on the performance date. Monson discusses the relationship of Bussani's text to
the original drama in his extensive preface to Sartorio's music (cf. ultra).

'S7 The winter solstice on the Julian calendar.
'S Selfridge-Field, Pallade veneta, p. 339.
'? Vavoulis, Massi, p. 597.

' In his edition of selections from this work (Antonio Sartorio: Giulio Cesare, ed. Craig Monson [Madison: A-R Editions, Inc., 1991], Ser.
2, Vol. 12).

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 121

1677/1 Elena rapita da Paride Music by Domenico Freschi'*
[HELEN ABDUCTED BY PARIS]
A dramma per musica Text provisionally attributed to Giacomo Fr. Bussani'
mM Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1677-01-11
a Dedicated to Count Naimiro Conti'
 The abduction of Helen of Troy by Paris precipitated the Trojan War. This account highlighted Paris's

betrayal of the Trojan nymph Oenone/Enone and their infant son, who later became known as the
Shepherd of Mt. Ida.'* Elena rapita was the inaugural work for the Teatro di Sant' Angelo. Although
the theater's opening was said on 21 November 1676 to be imminent,' a license to print the libretto
was not issued until 27 December, by which time theaters and gambling houses were closed through
10 January for a universal jubilee (I-MOas A, NV). Four theaters (re)opened on the 11th.' This total
must have included Sant' Angelo.' Therefore 11 January 1677 appears to have been both the opening
date for the work and the inaugurul date for the theater.

 @&<*  Elenawas noted in the Mercure of the following August' for the magnificence of its sets. The beauty
of the voices of the very able musicians' who appeared in it responded perfectly to the profound
understanding of the excellent Sig. Domenico Freschi. The text was enormously popular, and the work
enjoyed settings over the next few years in Bergamo, Lucca, Milan, Modena, Verona, and Vienna as
well as Hanover before being revived in Venice (1687/2). The work was also translated into Dutch
and revised by Antonio Fiocco (Amsterdam, 1681).

fi Scores in I-MOe, Vnm; arias in I-Rvat, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SAng 1; Bonlini 152; Groppo 155; Alm 219, 220

1677/2 Totila Music attributed to Giovanni Legrenzi
[ToTILa]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
ry Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a battle scene and ballo SORTING DATE: 1677-02-04~
a Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua
Ow Totila, king of the Ostrogoths [541-562], born in Treviso, defended Verona and other northern Italian

cities against the Romans and captured new territory including Ravenna.' This work treated his siege

6 A priest, Freschi was a canon and maestro di cappella at the cathedral in Vicenza. He was frequently called upon to provide music for Venetian
nobles vacationing at their villas along the River Brenta.

' The fede (I-Vas, RSP) says that the work (which is unattributed in the libretto) was by Bussani. It is credited to Aureli in nearly all
bibliographies, perhaps by reference to Aureli's Elena rapita da Teseo (set by Cavalli in 1653). Anello Paullilli had composed a tragedy in
verse on Il ratto di Elena in the 1560s (cf. Riccoboni, Histoire, p. 120).

8 4 Venetian nobleman, probably a naturalized one, since the name is not Venetian.
4 The main differences between the two versions of the libretto (US-LAu 219 and 220) were in the prologue. See also Suppl. 5a, 1700.
'5 Literally in breve (GB-Lpro).

'66 |-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 118, f. 29. The four theaters would not have included San Cassiano, which was a comedy house at the time, since
it did not reopen until after the feast of Santa Maria Formosa (I-MOas A).

7 San Cassiano was hosting the comedy troupe of the duke of Parma at the time (I-MOas A).
8 Aout 1677, pp. 40fT.
' Literally virtuosi molto bravi (Selfridge-Field, Pallade veneta, pp. 339f).

' Works with a Byzantine connection may have suited the Grimani brothers because, according to one legend, their family was originally
from Constantinople and went to Ravenna during the period recounted here (Discendenze patrizie, iv, 188). In their own account, however,
they claimed descent from imperial Rome. The significance here is that the capital had been moved by Byzantine rulers from Rome to Ravenna.

122 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

of Rome [546]. Totila had opened as the second opera between 2 and 6 February 1677 (I-MOas A).
Legrenzi's setting had several previous productions (see 1666/3). A revised version was given in Palermo
in 1696.

BO The scenery was described at length in Le Mercure galant.'"' Before Peace descended in a machine,
there was a particularly spectacular battle between the Vandals and the Roman army. If the work had
played in Paris, the Mercure correspondent conjectured, one would not have wanted to leave town for
several days. The duke of Mantua found the new machines at the most noble Grimani the-
ater...singular.'? The work was noted for its trumpet solos,' although according to the Mercure's
account, these served more to reinforce the idea of military superiority than to enhance the music.

 The duke of Mantua, who was in Venice from the 6th until the end of carnival,' left very large gifts
to the performers and seems to have heard them perform in private near the end of Carnival at the
Cavallerizza (I-MOas A).

A Score in I-Vnm;' arias in CH-Zz; I-BRc, Fc, MOe, Nc, Vc, Vnm, Vqs'
Listed as Galvani SSGP 61; Bonlini 153; Groppo 156; Alm 221, 222

171

1677/3 Il Nicomede in Bitinia Music by Carlo Grossi!
[NICOMEDES IN BITHYNIA]
A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Matteo Giannini
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With prologue and balli SORTING DATE: 1677-02-06~
& Dedicated to the Empress, Eleonora Gonzaga
oO Following Pierre Corneille's Nicomede (1651), Nicomedes, the king of Bithynia [northern Turkey],

was overpowered by Mithridates, the king of Pontos who was secretly supported by the Romans.
Nicomede had opened by the 6 February 1677 (I-MOas A); its libretto was dedicated on the 4th. In
the August 1677 issue of Le Mercure galant, Nicomede in Bitinia was rated most excellent, partly
on account of its delicate taste. Grossi's skills as an opera composer were said to be among the best
of that science.'* According to the libretto, the composer had studied every form of delight and
would give new attestations of his harmonic intelligence to the world with his new and bizarre
inventions. A prologue for Venus and Mars was added in the second version (US-LAu 224).

'"' Issue of Aodt 1677, pp. 75-86. The commentary is reproduced in Bellina (Totila, see below) and in Selfridge-Field, Pallade veneta, p.
338.

'? T-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 118 (1677), f. 63v, dispatch of 30 Gennaro 1677.
'3 The leading trumpeter in Venice during Legrenzi's years there was Alessandro Fedeli.

' The duke had arrived in Venice by the middle of January but had returned to Mantua, where his wife was ill (I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 118 [1677],
ff. 48v, 63v).

"5 Facs. edn. of the score in IOB, 9. Another copy of the score also belonged to Giovanni Rossi (see I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

"6 In her article Totila, Belisario, |' orso, e l'elefante, Bellina shows how bits of the original score were disseminated from a lost autograph
to produce the following families of source material: (1) 37 canzonettes in I-Vqs; (2) arias in -MOe and I-Nc as well as the score now in I-Vnm;
and (3) other arias and excerpts in I-BRc, Fc, Vc, Vnm, and Vgqs. Despite the work's enthusiastic reception, Bellina notes that the sources
transmitted show extensive evidence of haste and indifference to the text.

7' Considered a respectable organist and revered as a bass, Carlo Grossi (c. 1634-1688) had served as organist and maestro di canto at the
Ospedale de' Mendicanti, Venice, from 1664 to 1667. He subsequently took positions at the churches of San Marco and SS. Giovanni e Paolo.
Grossi is identified as a maestro di cappella at the Ospedali de' Derelitti (the Ospedaletto) in the libretto for this work. The nineteenth-century
historian Francesco Caffi maintained that Grossi exaggerated the recognition he achieved. Recent research by Seifert (La figura, 42f.) indicates
that, although Cesti himself recommended Grossi to succeed P. A. Ziani as maestro di cappella to the Dowager Empress Eleonora, Grossi
posthumously received credit for at least two of Cesti's works (Artaserse, 1668/2, and Giocasta, 1676/4). He was identified in the libretto
of the latter work as a Cavalier.

"8 Original transcribed in Selfridge-Field, Pallade veneta, p. 339.

1677/4

mM

i)
OOn

1677/5

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 123

Scores in F-Pc; I-Vnm; arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SMoi 19; Bonlini 154; Groppo 157; Alm 223, 224

Antonino e Pompeiano Music by Antonio Sartorio
[ANTONINUS AND POMPEIANUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Giacomo Francesco Bussani
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1677-02-10

Dedicated to Johann Friedrich and Benedetta Henrichetta, the Duke and Duchess of Brunswick!

In Roman history of late second century, the degenerate tyrant Antoninus lusted after Julia, the wife
of Pompeianus, and schemed to imprison his rival. Pompeianus was saved by Publius Helvius Pertinax.
Antonino opened as the second opera on 10 February 1677 (GB-Lpro, I-MOas A). The dedicatees
had arrived by 23 January (NV) and Bassani thanked Johann Friedrich for accepting the dedication
on 12 February.'* The production was applauded in every respect by the British resident (GB-Lpro)
and found to be admirable in all respects in the Mercure galant, which reported that the proof of its
success was in the large audience that it drew.'*' Bussani's text was later set by C. F. Pollarolo (Brescia,
1689), Francesco Ballarotti (Genoa, 1695), and anonymously (Wolfenbiittel, 1709).'*? Antonino employed
the same cast as Giulio Cesare (1676/6). The balli were for Moors and heroic lovers.

Score in D-HVI; arias in I-Nc, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSal 27; Bonlini 155; Groppo 158; Alm 225

Arsinoe' Music by Petronio Franceschini!
[ARSINOE]

A dramma per musica Text by Tomaso Stanzani'*
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1677-11-29

Dedicated to Antonio Teodoro Trivulzio'

The subject (perhaps suggested by Corneille) concerned amorous intrigues at the court of Arsinoe, the
queen of Cyprus. Although the libretto bears the dedication date of the 30th, Arsinoe opened on 29
November 1677 (GB-Lpro, I-NV).'* The work had opened in Bologna at the Teatro Formigliare on
26 December 1676.'*' With various revisions it was later performed in Innsbruck (1686) and London
(1705, 1707).

Scores in I-Vnm (2); arias in I-Vqs

Listed as Galvani SAng 2; Bonlini 156; Groppo 159; Alm 226

' The duchess was the daughter of the Elector Palatine.
'8 Vavoulis, Massi, p. 597.

'S! Selfridge-Field, Pallade veneta, p. 339. It was common for rewritings of avvisi and kindred periodicals to be only thinly revised, as is

demonstrated here.
182

Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 88.

8 Franceschini was a cellist at San Petronio, Bologna, from 1675 until his death in 1680.

' Tomaso Stanzani was from Bologna. A drama of the same name by Giacomo Castoreo had been given at the Teatro ai Saloni with a musical
prologue and four intermedi in 1655 (see Galvani App2/8, Alm 90).

'85 Count of Gongonzola and Codogno as well as a prince of the Holy Roman Empire, Trivulzio had been the dedicatee in 1676 of Borzio's
Narciso, which was performed in Lodi. Its text was by Francesco de Lemene (1634-1704), who, like Borzio, was a native son.

'8 The dedication was signed by the impresario Francesco Santurini.

' Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 106.

124 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1677/6 Anacreonte tiranno' Music by Antonio Sartorio
[ANACREON THE TYRANT]
A dramma per musica Text by Giacomo Francesco Bussani
im Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With a giuoco and battle scene SORTING DATE: 1677-12-02
& Dedicated to Pietro Ottoboni,'** N.V.
Oo The tyrant Anacreon usurped the throne of Cyprus, precipitating a series of conflicts between good

and evil which are recounted in this drama. Anacreonte opened on 2 December 1677 (GB-Lpro, I-MOas
A).' Scarlatti's setting of Bussani's text was given, with revisions, at Pratolino (Florence) in 1698.

 Sartorio mentioned in a note that the cast of Anacreonte included a Neapolitan mezzo soprano named
Gerolimo Coccola, who, he held, surpassed Giuseppino [Giuseppe Maria Donati] or Siface [Gio.
Francesco Grossi].' Pietro Dolfin reported that the landgrave of Hesse was occupying the box of the
duke of Brunswick. The productions of Anacreonte and Arsinoe (1677/5) had been attended by 11
December (I-Rvat NV) by the duke of Radzivil, who was visiting Venice with his consort (the sister
of Jan Sobieski, the king of Poland) and an entourage of 150 as he traveled to Rome, where he was
to take up the post of Polish ambassador to the Holy See.

A Score in D-MUs;'' arias in CH-Zz; GB-Lbl; I-MOe, Nc, Rvat, Vlevi, Vnm, Vqs; US-BEu
Listed as Galvani SSal 28; Bonlini 160; Groppo 163; Alm 231

1677/7 Scipione africano' Music by Fr. Cavalli, rev. Gio. Bonaventura Viviani'
[ScIPIO AFRICANUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Nicold Minato, rev. Tebaldo Fattorini
MM Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Advent (Novena)
With balli and cori SORTING DATE: 1677-12-19~
& Dedicated to Ferdinando della Torre [Torriano], Baron of Taxis!

In Roman history, the courageous Scipio Africanus entered Africa and established a Roman province
there. This account emphasizes his relations with the conquered Carthaginians, whose leader, Hasdrubal,
was defeated by Scipio's forces. In addition to ten named characters and three anonymous ones (a sybil,
a cadaver, and a soldier), Scipione also called for ten cori, including one of singers and instrumentalists
and one of gladiators.

Or This resetting of Scipione, which had won great acclaim in Cavalli's setting of 1664, went into production
on or shortly after 19 December 1677 (GB-Lpro; I-MOas A, NV 'TM). The title-page was dated 1678.
Silvani's text for Sofonisba (1708/8) was indebted to that of Scipione. In the original production, and
apparently in this one, trumpets and violins played to prepare the audience for the amphitheater full
of spectators they would see when the curtain went up. The cast in 1677-78 may have included Giuseppe

88 Son of Antonio.

' 4 date of 9 December 1677 is given by Edward H. Tarr and Norbert Dubowy in NGDMM/2. The Riformatori licensed the printing of a
commedia in versi for the same work on 8 December (I-Vas, RSP, Filza 287, unnumbered folio).

' Vavoulis, Massi, p. 598. See also 1677/7.

'! Attributed in this source to Alessandro Scarlatti.

' The Veronese composer Viviani served as maestro di cappella in Innsbruck.

83 Count Taxis (Tassis) had been appointed imperial ambassador to Venice in 1676, but his later role as imperial postmaster (inherited upon
his father's death in 1691) was of more significance.

' Reported to be opening soon on the 18th and in progress by the 26th in I-MOas; reported to have opened during the week preceding the
25th in NV and GB-Lpro. Its opening had been anticipated for 6 December (GB-Lpro).

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 125

Maria Donati and Gio. Francesco Grossi, who were said on 6 December to have been engaged by the
Grimani.'%
fi Scores (1664 version) in I-Rvat, Sc, Vnm;'6 P-La (Act 3 only); arias in I-Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSGP 62; Bonlini 159; Groppo 162; Alm 230

1678/1 Medea in Atene' Music attributed to Antonio Giannettini!
[MEDEA IN ATHENS]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With prologue and balli SORTING DATE: 1678-01-05~
& Dedicated to Gerolamo Fierenze Galenti'

This revival of 1675/3 was introduced by a prologue for five gods (including Pluto, Neptune, and Jupiter).
It retained the seven original roles, the part for a speaking cadaver, and the five cori.

 The libretto' was dedicated by the composer on 30 December 1677. The intended opening may have
been impeded by misadventure. On 5 January 1678 the noblemen Pietro Bembo and Girolamo Cornaro
were required to appear before the Maggior Consiglio to explain why masked, armed soldiers, allegedly
in their employ, had stopped an instrumentalist from entering Sant' Angelo and thus had prevented the
performance of an opera. This suggests 4 January 1678 as the intended opening date and 5 January
as the actual opening date. The run appears to have continued until 22 February, the last night of Carnival,
when a private ball was given in the Cappello palace (NV).?"!

A Score in I-Vnm (1675); arias in I-MOe, Vqs (1675)
Listed as Galvani SAng 3; Bonlini 157; Groppo 160; Alm 227

1678/2 Il Vespasiano Music by Carlo Pallavicino
[VESPASIAN]
A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
rd Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and cori SORTING DATE: 1678-01-24
& Dedicated to Vincenzo Gonzaga, Marquis of Mantua?

In the first century, the Roman commander Titus Flavius Vespasianus recovered much of the Holy Land
on behalf of the emperor Nero. After Nero was deposed, Vespasian was proclaimed emperor by his
legions and served from 69 to 79 AD. The tale related here concerned the intrigues of Vespasianus's

'5 Vavoulis, Massi, p. 598. See Sartori's comparison of singers (1677/6).

' Facs. edn., IOB, 5. A copy of the score also belonged to Giovanni Rossi (see I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

'7 Giannettini was a singer and organist in Venice.

'8 A cavalier of the Holy Roman Empire.

' US-LAu 224. Because the text had been vetted in 1675, no license to print a libretto for this production would have been required.

2 |-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 119, f. 21 (entry of 8 Gennaro 1678). On 10 January the noblemen were severely fined and nine of their group punished
(loc. cit., f.47, entry of 15 Gennaro 1678). The most important instrumentalist would presumably have been a continuo player, and the composer
was usually one of these, so it could have been Giannettini whose access was blocked. The matter could have been related to the guerra de'
palchi, to which allusion is made in op. cit., f. 7, entry of 1 Gennaro 1678: Sono alcuni giorni, ch'in due di questi teatri restano sospese per

ordine publico I'Opere in Musica a conto di differenze per palchetti, che si procura di sopire. The two theaters were probably SS. Giovanni
e Paolo and Sant' Angelo.

! Members of the Cappello family were owners of the theater, which may not have been large enough for the ball.

2 A cousin of the Grimani brothers, which makes the saccharine dedication somewhat self-serving.

126 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

sons and military commanders. In his dedication, Corradi called attention to the heaven of marvels
(cielo di meraviglie) that the marquis would see, as in Archimedes' mirror, when he reviewed the
achievements of his illustrious family.

i) Vespasiano was the inaugural work for the Teatro di San Giovanni Grisostomo, the phoenix of theaters,
according to its libretto, which was dedicated on 20 January 1678.2" The opening date was 24 January
(I-MOas A). The duke of Radzivil extended his stay in Venice on 29 January so he could see the
work a second time (I-MOas).2% The cast of Vespasiano included Salina Basso (Vespasiano), Gio.
Francesco Grossi (Zito), Giuseppe Maria Donati (Domitiano), Giulia Zuffi (Arricida), Marc' Antonio
Origoni (Attilio), Francesco Maria Sassi (Sergio), Alessandro Moscanera (Licinio), Francesca Cottini
(Gesilla), and Tomaso Boni (Zelto).

Ow The production attracted a stupendous crowd on successive evenings and was found to be as beautiful
as it could possibly be (sommamente bella). The work involved six machines (including one of Apollo
on Mt. Parnassus), eight cori (including one of courtesans), three balli (including one of gamblers),
and several scenes of mock violence, including a rape and a fire. Trumpets were used in the sinfonia
of Act Two. The festa di ballo which took place on Shrove Tuesday attracted an overflow crowd (I-MOas
A).? The run concluded on 22 February 1678." Between 1680 and 1695, // Vespasiano had at least
eleven revivals and partial revivals in Italy.

A Scores in I-MOe (2), Vnm;2"' arias in B-Bc; CH-Zz; I-MOe, Rvat, Vlevi, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SGG 1; Bonlini 158; Groppo 161; Alm 228, 229

P08

1678/3 Ercole sul Termodonte Music by Antonio Sartorio
[HERCULES ON THE THERMODON]
A dramma per musica Text by Giacomo Francesco Bussani
rd Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1678-01-26~
a Dedicated to Maddalena Bernini Locatelli"?
olor a In Greek legend Theseus/Teseo, a follower of Hercules, imprisoned Hippolyte/Ippolite, the queen of

the Amazons. In this plot he and other associates of Hercules were condemned to a subterranean abyss
near the Thermodon," which flowed northwest into the Black Sea. Ercole probably opened in the later
part of January 1678, though interest in it would have been eclipsed by the premiere of Vespasiano

2} Since a Gonzaga duke of the sixteenth century also shared the name Vespasiano, the subject could have had a double meaning for the dedicatee
of this work.

24 Often erroneously taken to have been the opening date of the theater. Boxes in the new theater were being offered in January 1677 (Vavoulis,
Massi, p. 597), but the date could be old-style.

 The 23rd is prospectively reported in I-Rvat, AS, NV, N.118, f. 60v, entry of 22 Gennaro 1678, where it is stated that the new theater riesce
per la costruzione, e nobilta de pit: famosi d' Europa, ancorche sia stato fabricato nel solo corso di 5. in 6. mesi.

26 A lavish ball and breakfast were given in Radzivil's honor by Angelo Morosini on the night of 3-4 January (/oc. cit.).

7 In the Venetian revival of 1680 the following parts were re-assigned: Antonio Fontana (Formenti) sang in the title role (Vespasiano) with
Cattarina Angela Borghi (Arricida), Alessandro Girardini (Attilio), Anna Maria Scalati (Sergio), Francesco Ballarini (Licinio), and Francesco
de Castris (Gesilla). Casts were faithfully transcribed, where they exist, by Francesco Caffi in his MS Appunti per aggionto, in this case
ff. 49f. They are replicated in Saunders, Repertoire and, to the extent they were published, in Alm's Catalog.

28 1 iterally, un concorso indicibile.

2 Grossi, who entered the service of Duke Francesco II d'Este in 1679, became both one of the most arrogant and one of the most colorful
singers on the Italian stage.

210 1_Fas, Lettere dei Residenti, Filza 3040, f. 69.

21! Another copy of the score also belonged to Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It., VII-1613).
2? She was the marchioness of Ceva.

213 1.Vas, IS, Busta 914, Fasc. S. Luca, entry of 22 Febraro 1678 [Shrove Tuesday].

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 127

(1678/2) at the new Teatro di San Giovanni Grisostomo."* According to the libretto, the music of Sartorio
became steadily more marvelous. At the end of the season one of San Salvatore's singers, Gio. Angelo
Marenghi from Cremona, went to court to claim the 100 silver scudi due him from the impresario Iseppo
Astori for the previous contractual year.?'

A Arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSal 29; Bonlini 163; Groppo 166; Alm 234

1678/4 Tullia superba' Music by Domenico Freschi
[TULLIA THE SUPERB]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Medolago'
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1678-01-29~
&o Dedicated to Prince Lorenzo Onofrio Colonna Gioeni?'
Oo Under the spell of the enchantress Circe, Tarquinius is said to have forced the princess Tullia to kill

her husband, marry him, and then kill her father so that he could inherit the Roman throne. The libretto
was dedicated on 29 January 1678. The year must be new-style, because if the production were in 1679,
there would have been a conflict with La Circe,'* which, however, borrows the imagery of sorcery,
which was to become Sant' Angelo's speciality. Tullia superba was given in Reggio in 1679.7!

fi Scores in I-MOe (2), Vnm; arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SAng 4; Bonlini 161; Groppo 164; Alm 232

1678/5 L' Aurora in Atene Music by Antonio Giannettini
[AURORA IN ATHENS]
A dramma per musica Text by Girolamo Frisari
1" Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1678-02-10~
e Dedicated to Antonio Grimani, N.V.
 In Greek mythology Aurora personified the dawn. She first noticed the hunter Kephalos/Cefalo, the

prince of Athens, shortly after his marriage to Procris. After he rejected her advances, she pronounced
a curse on him which was fulfilled years later when his javelin pierced his own wife as she, intent on
learning the identity of his secret love, pursued him through the woods. Only too late did she learn that
his secret love was for the morning breeze. The libretto for L Aurora was dedicated on 10 February
1678. The date is probably new-style because in 1678 a run could have lasted until the 22nd, while
in 1679 it would have had to end by the 14th. The audience (in 1678) is likely to have included the
duke of Mantua and the prince of Baden-Durlach, then the general of the imperial army (NV).

214 Bussani's text was later set by Rampini (Padua, 1715), Vivaldi (Rome, 1723), and Bioni (Wroctaw, 1730).

215 1-Vas, IS, Busta 914, fasc. San Luca, unnumbered folio of 22 Febraro 1678 [not M.V. because while 22 Febraro was the end of Carnival
in 1678, it was not in 1679.

216 Medolago was a Florentine whose few works seem not to have been well received in Venice.
*!7 Contestabile of Naples. On his relationship to Venetian opera, see the note under Tito (1666).
218 For which Thomas Walker and Beth Glixon give the year as 1678 in NGDMM/2.

2! The performance in Reggio featured T. L. Rossi in the title role with F. Draghi (Tarquinio) and Margarita Salicola (Domizia; see Fabbri
and Verti, Due secoli, p. 42). Cimarosa's much later opera on the same subject (Milan, 1782; libretto by Domenico Perelli) gave a different
account of the story.

2 Frisari was a learned Venetian whose few later stage works emphasized stupendous images. The libretto acknowledges that this story was
based on II ratto di Cefalo by Berni (Ferrara, 1650).

128

1678/6

V1

OB

OOF:

1678/7

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSGP 63; Bonlini 162; Groppo 165; Alm 233

Sesto TarquinioTM Music by Giovanni Battista Tomasi!
[SEXTUS TARQUINIUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Camillo Badovaro
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1678-12-09

Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua

This account of the deeds of Sextus Tarquinius (compare to 1678/4) emphasized the brutality of his
military exploits. Sesto opened on 9 December 1678 and ran until c. 20 January 1679 (I-MOas A).
The libretto was dedicated on 5 December. A license to print il drama intitolato il Tarquinio was
issued to Francesco Nicolini, the impresario, on 6 December 1678.

As staged, the work contained singing roles for eight Romans and six Tuscans. It also employed some
twenty-three groups of princes, soldiers, and pages to represent the relative importance of each of the
major figures. One ballo was in the Armenian style. On 24 December Legrenzi wrote to Ippolito
Bentivoglio that the work lacked an enthusiastic response and that people spoke ill of both the poetry
and the music. At this point, he went on, it had had more than one performance for which only 30
or 40 tickets were sold. The cast was not bad, he added, but they did not sing up to the standard of
Cortona [Domenico Cecchi], who really sings well. For their appearances in two productions (this
one and J due tiranni al soglio, 1679/2}) at San Salvatore, Cecchi and Margarita Pio each received 400
gold pistoles, while Giulia Romana received 250, according to the Mercure. When the dedicatee left
Venice on 5 January 1679, he took Pio with him to Mantua.

Arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSal 30; Bonlini 164; Groppo 167; Alm 235

Sardanapalo' Music by Domenico Freschi
[SARDANAPALOS]

A dramma per musica Text by Carlo Maderni*
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With baili (1st version); prologue (2nd version) SORTING DATE: 1678-12-10

Dedicated to Carlo Vicenzo Giovanelli, N.V.2

*! Gio, Battista Tomasi was currently an organista di camera in the employ of the duke of Mantua.

? This Roman count (also Badoar, Badoer, Badovero) was in the employ of the duchy of Mantua, eventually becoming the court's official
poet. He also worked in the 1680s as an informer to Venetian state inquisitors (see I-Vas, IS, Buste 547, 548 et al. for his reports).

3 According to Badovaro, an earlier version of this text had been produced nine years earlier.

?4 A. Morelli, Legrenzi, p. 69: ...l'opera del teatro Santo Luca non ha, non dico aplauso, ma ne meno compatimento, mentre dicono male
d'ogni cosa...ed in particolare...della poesia et della musica.

5 L_Rvat, AS, NV, N. 120, f. 10v.

6 Sardanapolo is the only known libretto by the Venetian Maderni.

7 The count had a high social profile in Venice in the 1670s and 1680s. He was the dedicatee of one volume (Marzo 1687) of the published
monthly Pallade veneta and may have been an important collector of paintings. Giorgione's La Tempesta hung in his family's collection near
San Felice for many years.

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 129

 Sardanapalos, the last king of the Assyrians,* was dissolute in the extreme. After he abducted the
princess Armisia, his subjects, led by Armisia's beloved Arbakes, rose up against him. According
to the libretto for the first version, soldiers lighted pipes of tobacco from an on-stage lantern in one
of the baili. In the second version, the bal/i were eliminated and a prologue for Venus, Ceres, and Bacchus
was introduced. Sardanapalo opened on 10 December 1678. Publicity was in circulation by the 3rd
(I-MOas A). A license to print the libretto had been issued on 25 November. It was in print by 19
December, when Sartorio sent copies of it and the libretto from Sesto Tarquinio to Johann Friedrich.

 5 This and a number of other works of the same season were discussed in a dispatch given in the Avril
1679 issue of Le Mercure galant.* For Sardanapalo and Circe it mentioned the beauty of the machines
and scenery and the quality (bonte) of the instruments and the music. Legrenzi indicated on 24 December
that it was not attracting much interest, however. Pietro Dolfin indicated in a letter of 29 December
that neither Sardanapolo nor Sesto Tarquinio (1678/6) had been particularly successful.

fi Scores in F-Pn; I-MOe, Vnm; arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SAng 5; Bonlini 165; Groppo 168; Alm 236, 237

 1678b Il perfetto Ibraim, gran visir di Costantinopoli. Cf. Suppl. Sa.
1678/8 Il Nerone' Music by Carlo Pallavicino
[NERO]
A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
MM Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With concerti SORTING DATE: 1678-12-31
& Dedicated to Isabella Clara, Duchess of Mantua?*

The reign of the emperor Nero [54-68 AD], whose tyranny and self-indulgence had made him unpopular,
marked the end of the dynasty founded by Augustus. Nero had been instructed in music and art by Seneca,
who was later imprisoned. After the celebrated fire of Rome in the year 64, Nero built himself an
extravagant palace, the Domus Aurea on the Esquiline Hill. After having both his mother and his wife
murdered, he committed suicide. His reign was followed by civil war.

Ove One of Pallavicino's most celebrated works, // Nerone opened on 31 December 1678 (CO; I-MOas
A; NV).7 It had revivals in Genoa in 1681 and Naples in 1686. The cast included Giuseppe Maria
Donati (Giuseppino di Bavaria) in the title role, with Gio. Francesco Grossi (Siface) as Tiridates,
and Francesco de Castris (Lepido) in his operatic debut.?* Each singer was paid 1000 pistoles d'or

28 Although the name is recurrent in Italian accounts, the name of the historical figure is otherwise rendered as Ashurbanipal.

2 The story, which became better known in the English-speaking world through Byron's poem La Mort de Sardanapale (which in turn
inspired the like-named painting of 1827 by Delacroix), may have been derived from Camillo Contarini's tragidramma L 'Arbace of 1667.

230 US-LAu 236.

23! Tn the form of cartelli d'invito for Sardanapalo lascivo. The theme of the lascivious East was to become a common one in later works,
both literary and musical (Kabbani, East, passim).

282 Vavoulis, Massi, p. 598.

23 Le Mercure galant, Avril 1679, pp. 75-94.
24 A. Morelli, Legrenzi, p. 69.

235 Vavoulis, Massi, P. 598.

236 Also Archduchess of Austria, she was the mother of Ferdinando Carlo and had governed the Duchy of Mantua as regent from 1665 to 1669,
when her 17-year-old son took control of affairs. The duchess, a staunch defender of Mantua, also maintained strong Spanish ties.

237 Among the attendees was the prince of Ligny (NV).

38 Other parts were taken by Filippo Rustichelli (Seneca), and Tomaso Boni (Niso). The singers of the roles of Pisone, Celia, and Zabio are
not specified in Caffi, Appunti, ff. 49f.

130 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

for the season. The staging involved 200 extras used as soldiers, two elephants to pull Nero's chariot,
and a horse for Tiridates.

 ws An extended commentary in the Avril 1679 issue of Le Mercure galant praised the sumptuousness
of the symphony, musicians, decorations, and machines and included one aria. To emphsize the
emperor's legendary love of music, the work opened with a concert of numerous instruments. Nerone's
depiction of an accademia di strumenti (including recorders, trumpets, drums, and members of the viol
and violin families) became an often cited but misleading proof of the lavish instrumentation of
Venetian operas. What it actually documents is opulent staging rather than customary orchestration.

According to the Mercure, Nero presented a superb feast in a grotto covered with clouds. Instrumentalists
played from all the recesses of the grotto....In the middle of the feast, Nero's palace was besieged....A
huge battle, lasting half an hour, took place. Nero ordered that a symphony be given immediately. It
was presented on a rotating machine which emerged from the entrance to the palace and appeared to
become larger as it approached [the audience]. As the clouds cleared, recorders, trumpets, timpani,
viols, and violins were revealed. They were joined by the regular orchestra to produce the most beautiful
and melodious [performance] one has ever heard.TM"' Other entertainments within the accademia included
the singing of Nero and the staging of a comedy (Act III, Scenes 2-7).* Pallavicino was praised in
the Mercure for a manner [of composing] that was as galant as it was spiritual.
St. Didier's account is also engaging. He says that Nero presented Tiridates with a Roman circus. The
triumphal chariot of the emperor and empress was pulled by an elephant. The movements ofits head,
trunk, and eyes convinced the Armenian that it was alive, but no sooner had the pair stepped down than
skin segments of the elephant were transformed into the shields of emerging gladiators.

fi Arias in Le Mercure galant, Avril 1679; D-HVs; GB-Lbl, Ob; I-MOe, Rvat, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SGG 2; Bonlini 166; Groppo 169; Alm 239, 240

 1678a La politica mascherata. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1679/1 Alessandro Magno in Sidone Music by Marc' Antonio ZianiTM
[ALEXANDER THE GREAT IN SIDON]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
M1 Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo and a battaglia SORTING DATE: 1679-01-07
& Dedicated to Gio. Carlo Grimani,* N.V.

23 Le Mercure galant, Avril 1679, pp. 83-90.

 The Mercure's account estimated the number of stage instruments in // Nerone at forty. The typical accompaniment ensemble of the time
would have contained ten instruments or so.

4! Le Mercure galant, Avril 1679, pp. 87-90.

 On the night of the opening a fight outside the theater involving one member each from the Erizzo and Marcello families resulted not only
in injuries to the combatants but also in the Council of Ten's determination to temporarily withhold permission for masking (I-Rvat, AS, NV,
N. 120, f. 11, entry of 7 January 1679).

4 Saint Didier, La Ville, quoted in Nagler (Source Book, pp. 267f), whose assumption that the description concerns Orlandini's setting (1721/3)
is mistaken.

244 A letter written by Legrenzi on 24 December 1678 indicates that he expected the composer of Alessandro Magno to be Giannettini (A.
Morelli, Legrenzi, p. 69). Giannettini and Ziani both had ties with Mantua.

245 Giovanni Carlo and his brother Vincenzo Grimani were co-owners of the comedy house at San Samuele, of SS. Giovanni e Paolo, and of
the new Teatro di San Giovanni Grisostomo.

OO

1679/2

OBE

1679/3

mM

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 131

The subject, possibly following Racine, was from Persian history. A fter conquering Persia, Alexander
the Great turned his attention to Sidon and Tyre, two cities on the coast of Phoenicia, just as the young
king Eumenes was attracted to the learned but lascivious Taide (much praised by the poet Menander).

Alessandro Magno opened on 7 January 1679, when it was described as most beautiful (I-MOas A).
Ziani's work was restaged as La Virti sublimata dal Grande in Naples (6 November 1679) and Venice
(1683/8). The Mercure commented on superb decorations and on the use of live horses which pulled
carriages in one scene and were mounted by cavaliers in another. Apollo and the nine muses descended
from Heaven in a machine which took up the full width (toute la face) of the stage and, taking a cue
from J] Nerone, offered an admirable symphony. The first bal/o was danced to this sinfonia. In the
second interlude, gladiators fought with two lions which had escaped from the serraglio.

Score in I-Nc (1679), Vnm;7*' arias in D-HVs, I-MOe, Nc, Rvat, Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSGP 64; Bonlini 167; Groppo 170; Alm 241

I due tiranni al soglio Music attributed to Antonio Sartori
[Two TYRANTS ON THE THRONE]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1679-01-21

Dedicated to Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor

The western emperor Valentinian II [d. 392] sought an alliance with the eastern emperor Theodosios
I (subsequently his brother-in-law) in order to strengthen his hand against the Parthian Osroes, the brother
of the king of Persia. This alliance produced the monster with two heads to which the title alludes.
(The symbolism also resonates with the Hapsburg coat-of-arms, which featured a two-headed eagle.)
I due tiranni opened on 21 January 1679 (I-MOas A). The libretto was dedicated on the 15th. Legrenzi's
letter of 24 December (1678) indicated that the producers had high aspirations for the work.? The work
was produced in Palermo in 1686.

According to Le Mercure, Sartorio was one of the most adventurous composers in Italy. The performers
were the best one could find anywhere. This work made use of numerous machines, one of which
provided a firmament of stars in the manner of a palace of the gods. People peered at them from
balconies. The correspondent estimated that this machine alone could not have been constructed for
less than 2,000 ecus. Cortona [Domenico Cecchi] and Margherita Pio were each paid 400 pistoles
for two months of performances. Giulia Romana received 250 pistoles.*!

Arias in I-Ne, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSal 31; Bonlini 169; Groppo 172; Alm 243

La Circe' Music by Domenico Freschi
[CIRCE]

A dramma per musica Text by Cristoforo Ivanovich
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

> The tragedies of Jean Racine (1639-99) marked the high point of French classical drama and served, directly or indirectly, as models for
numerous Venetian operas. Racine's Alexandre le grand (1665), may have provided a contextual framework for this work.

247 A copy of the score also belonged to Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

248 The long-lived Leopold (1640-1705) had reigned from 1658.

24 My thanks for Margaret Duggan, for noting the double allusion. It is unlikely that Noris intended the inference that the emperor was a tyrant.
250 A Morelli, Legrenzi, p. 69.

25 Le Mercure galant, Avril 1679, pp. 80ff. On monetary values, see App. 3.

132 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

With balli SORTING DATE: 1679-01-23
ia) Dedicated to Giovanni Cornaro, N.V.?>?
Oo InGreek legend, the sorceress Circe possessed a potion that could turn men into swine. The concentration

on her powers of enchantment may have been welcomed after the emphasis on Roman history in
Sant' Angelo's previous production, Tullia superba (1678/4). This work established sorcery as a signature
theme at Sant' Angelo. La Circe opened soon after 21 January 1679 (I-MOas A) but not before the 23rd
(the date of dedication of the libretto), which was the opening date of Carnival. Reports of a 1682
revival cannot be substantiated.* The Venetian production was preceded by such lavish praise for
a prior performance in Vienna that this production could not have failed to disappoint its audience.

fi Musical score in I-Vnm; arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SAng 6; Bonlini 170; Groppo 173; Alm 244

 1679a II Leandro. Cf. Suppl. 5c.
1679/4 Le amazzoni nelle isole fortunate Music by Carlo Pallavicino
[THE AMAZONS ON THE FORTUNATE ISLANDS]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Maria Piccioli?*
= Performed at the Villa Contarini (Piazzola*') SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With a prologue, cori, and balli SORTING DATE: 1679-11-11
ia Dedicated to Marco Contarini?**
 The Amazons of Thermodon, led by their princess, Pulcheria [Beauty], went to the Fortunate Islands

in order to subjugate Sultan, the king of Ethiopia. Sultan's captain, Anapiet, imprisoned Pulcheria.
Her cohort attempted to free her. The inaugural work for Contarini's private theater in his villa on the
River Brenta was performed on 11 November 1679, just before the nobility returned from villeggiatura
to the city. The libretto was dedicated on the same day; a license to print it had been issued on 24 October.
The work had had three performances by the 18th. Many nobles who had come to Piazzola for the
premiere remained for these and later performances (I-MOas A), perhaps because they were required
to operate machines in the production.

Ow The libretto gives an elaborate account of the work. It contained a prologue for Ingenuity (mounted
onan eagle), Difficulty (on a ostrich), and Fear (on a peacock). There were four female roles (Florinda,
Auralba, Jocasta, and Cilene) besides that of Pulcheria, plus the male roles of Sultan and Anapiet. The
goddess Juno appeared on a machine. There were crowd scenes (cori) for 100 Amazons (on foot), 100
Moors, 50 Amazons mounted on horseback, and miscellaneous pages, guards, and servants. One of
the most notable scenes (Act Two) featured an exhibition of military instruments. The duke of Mantua,
who attended the opening, is reported to have commented on the use of many theatrical machines of

252 This young nobleman was to serve as doge from 1709 until 1722.

253 The date of opening is reported as 23 January 1679/80 in NGDMM/2, but 1679 is the new-style year.

254 See Suppl. 1.

55 Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 89. The music in Vienna was by P. A. Ziani; the performance was on 9 June 1665 (Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 246).
256 Piccioli was a Paduan dramatist associated primarily with Piazzola.

?57 This work was performed in the villa's smaller theater, the Teatro delle Vergini. Its name recognized the three dozen young female musicians
who were housed and tutored there. While the Teatro delle Vergini is quite far removed socially from the public theaters of Venice proper,
documented performances such as this one appear to have been intended for the same audience as that in attendance at the main theater at

96 &

Piazzola, not for the residents of Piazzola's conservatorio.

258 Many of the libretti associated with productions at Piazzola seem to have had two printings, one in the villa itself and one in Padua. The
dedication for this work is found in the copy in I-Vgoldoni 59.A.266(1), which was printed in Padua.

 The libretto says Ethiopi in the summary and Egitii (Egyptians) in the list of characters.
26 Le Mercure galant, Fev. 1681, pp. 213-49.

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 133

singular invention [in the operation of which] the dukes of Modena and Nevers, as well as 80 Venetian
noblemen, assisted.' An avviso (I-MOas A) reported that there were 60 men on live horses and 300
men dressed in gold costumes in a pavilion with the queen, and that among the machines there was
one with a carriage drawn by six live horses.

A Score in I-Vnm??

No bibliographical listings known

1679/5 Ermelinda Music attributed to Carlo Fedeli?
[HERMELINDE]
A dramma per musica Text by Marco Morosini, N.V.2
MM Performed at the Teatro di Cannaregio SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1679-11-23~
& Dedicated to Marco Contarini, N.V.?*
 The modesty of Hermelinde, the beautiful Anglo-Saxon wife of the young Lombard king Cunibert,

who reigned in the late seventh century, enabled her to regain the fidelity of her husband after he
dallied with her lady-in-waiting, Theodata. All of the action in this account hinged on a bath scene
involving Hermelinde and Theodata, whose beauty the queen later described to her husband.* The
inaugural opera for this small theater, Ermelinda opened shortly before 25 November 1679 (I-MOas
A). A license to print the libretto had been issued on the 10th. The work met with such a poor reception
that its poet  nicknamed the old Rooster (Galeno Antico)  became the subject of satirical verses.?*

A Arias in I-Tn
Listed as Galvani CR 1; Bonlini 168; Groppo 171; Alm 242

Candaule' Music attributed to Pietr' Andrea Ziani

[CANDAULES]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli?
i Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's?)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1679-12-02~

261 

..-muchas maquinas Teatrales, de singolarissima invencidn, a que...assistieron los [duques] de Modena, y de Nevers, y ochenta Nobles
Venecianos (Gageta de Madrid, entry of 18 Noviembre 1679, p. 8). Less explicit references are also found in I-MOas A and NV.

262 Marco Contarini, the dedicatee, was the son of the sitting doge, Alvise Contarini. To judge from Saint-Didier's account of 1680, the doge's
son, being avaricious and deceitful, was generally distrusted. Despite these failings, he and his brother Carlo were both elected procurators
of San Marco. The 183 opera scores that the Contarini collected for the library at their villa formed the Contarini Codices. In 1843 they were
bequeathed to the Marciana (National) Library in Venice by Pietro Canal, the last descendant of a daughter of Alvise Contarini.

?6 Carlo Fedeli (often called Sajon or Saggione) was an eminent player of the violone and violoncino. He had various ties with the Contarini
villa at Piazzola (where a version of Ermelinda by Piccioli and Freschi was produced two years later) up to his death (1685). His five sons
were all active musicians who traveled widely and worked, at various times, in England, France, the northern provinces of Germany, and Poland.

264 Marco Morosini was the proprietor of the theater. Ruggiero Fedeli noted in the preface to S. Catterina d'Alessandria (Suppl. 8) that all
the musicians of his family, including his father Carlo, had enjoyed the privilege of working for the Morosini family.

265 The dedication of the libretto to Marco Contarini, currently in the limelight because of the production of Le amazzoni at Piazzola, seems
to have been intended to attract his attention. Morosini says in the preface that because he had written ten comedies, none of which had pleased
Contarini, he had here tried his hand at a dramma per musica.

266 At the time, the Angles occupied what today is southern Denmark. The Lombards were just to their south.
26? The work of the same name given at Piazzola in November 1681 was unrelated to this one.
268 Groppo MS, p. 92.

26 Morselli was the author of at least sixteen opera texts for Venetian theaters. He was appointed court poet to the duke of Mantua, to whom
many of his works were dedicated, and owned a villa some distance down the River Mincio from the city of Mantua.

134 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

& Dedicated to Francesco de' Medici?
In Greek legend, Candaules was so eager to show off the beauty of his wife that he arranged for his
servant to be hidden in her bedroom, an emphasis not unlike that of Ermelinda (1679/5).

Oo Candaule opened between 25 November and 9 December 1679 (I-MOas A), when it was found to be
admirable, although a poor attendance was anticipated on account of the quarantine in effect at the
borders of the Republic (NV).?' It was the first music-drama to be given at San Cassiano since 1666.
Both versions of the libretto carry the title-page date 1680, but bibliographers group it with the autumn
season of 1679. Advent began on December 3. Morselli's text was set by Francesco Provenzale for
almost simultaneous performance (the libretto was dedicated on 21 December 1679) in Naples. It was
reset by Sarri for performance there in 1716.

fi Score in D-AN; I-Vnm (1680); arias in B-Bc; GB-Ob; I-MOe, Tn, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SCas 22; Bonlini 172; Groppo 175; Alm 246, 247

1679/7 L'Alcibiade' Music by Marc' Antonio Ziani
[ALCIBIADES]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli?
ri Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Advent (Novena)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1679-12-21
& Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua

Alcibiades was an Athenian statesman whose endeavors were considered to illustrate the dangers of
ambition. A follower of Socrates, he was assassinated in 404 BC. The work contained a substantial
pastoral element. The sculptor Praxiteles and his followers also figured in the plot.

Ow Alcibiade opened on the unlikely date of 21 December 1679 and enjoyed great attendance (I-Moas A).
On 30 December Francesco de Castris wrote that he had thus far performed four times in the production.?
The duke of Mantua undoubtedly attended a performance, for when he left Venice on 6 January he
said he had seen all the operas that are being performed (I-MOas A).' The work may have been
related to the spoken play Amor non inteso given in Reggio Emilia in the spring of 1679 with a musical
prologue in which Maria Maddalena Musi sang as Amore. Ziani's was given in Modena on 6 March
1685.7

fi Scores in I-MOe, Vnm?; arias in B-Be; I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSGP 65; Bonlini 173; Groppo 176; Alm 249

27 Florentine patronage at this theater is noteworthy, because by the 1690s a firm link between San Cassiano and opera productions in Florence
had ben established.

2"! 4 plague in Germany was causing many visitors to be detained at the confines of the Venetian Republic for as long as 60 days. The papal
legate reported on 18 November 1679 (NV, N. 120, f. 1040) that the dukes of Brunswick, who were on their way to Venice for carnival, had
gone back to Germany because the quarantine prevented their immediate entry into the Veneto. La Gazeta ordinaria de Madrid (1680, p. 38)
reported that the duke reached Augsburg on the 23 December and sought permission to enter the Venetian Republic sobre que hasta aora
se suspende la respuesta, por los reglos de peste, que ay en algaenos Lugares, donde la ser a inevitable passar. He died in Augsburg on 17/28
December 1679.

2? With revisions by Carlo Bertoni, according to Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 31).

?3 Possibly in substitution for an ailing singer. See Vitali, De Castris, p. 599.

24 The duke was to return to Venice around 18 February.

275 See Fabbri and Verti, Due secoli, p. 45.

2% Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 31.

277 A copy of the score also belonged to Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1670-79) 135

1679/8 Messalina' Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[MESSALINA]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Maria Piccioli
i Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With prologue (2nd version only) and balli? SORTING DATE: 1679-12-30
rs) Dedicated to Anna Isabella Gonzaga, Duchess of Mantua
i) The lascivious Valeria Messalina, although married to the emperor Claudius in the first century AD,

made a spectacle of her infidelities and ultimately committed suicide. Another of Pallavicino's celebrated
works, Messalina was first performed on 30 December 1679,* when it was found to be admirable.*!
The first version of the libretto, which had balli for pages and gypsies, was dedicated on 28 December
1679. The second version, dedicated on 8 February 1679 [M.V.], was somewhat more regal. It began
with a prologue for Eternity and Poetry and had three new balli, one of which was for the Rays of Apollo.
In both cases the title-page was dated 1680.7

 Messalina offers one of the best documented cases of rapid work alteration within the context ofa single
production. Two versions of the libretti, the intact score, and different sets of preserved arias suggest
continuous revision, even though the work is known to have had only this one production.

A Score in I-Vnm;* arias in I-MOe, Tn (S. Luca 1679), I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSal 32; Bonlini 174; Groppo 177; Alm 250, 251

278 Two in the first version (US-LAu 250), three plus a prologue for Eternity and Poetry in the second (US-LAu 251).

> First wife of Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, she was the daughter of Ferdinando Gonzaga, the prince of Guastalla, and Marguerita d'Este. The
dedication of this work to her forms a vague parallel with the dedication the preceding year of Pallavicino's Nerone to Ferdinand's mother,
Isabella Clara. The emphasis on titillating scenes in Messalina, however, is more nearly resonant with other works already in production in
1679 (i.e., Ermelinda and Candaule).

2 Gaceta de Madrid, entry for 23 Enero 1679/80, p. 49.
28! The date is confirmed in I-MOas A.

? The subject had been treated in Pietr' Angelo Zaguri's opera scenica, given with a musical prologue and three canzonettes at the home of
GB. Sanudo in 1656 (Galvani App2/No. 10; Alm 92).

28 Facs. edn. (including all known textual and musical variants) with commentary by Eleanor Selfridge-Field in DMV, viii.

The 1680s: An Overview

n many ways, the 1680s represented a golden
ok decade for Venetian opera. The recent opening of

San Giovanni Grisostomo and Sant' Angelo greatly
increased the number of works produced. The increased
frequency of new productions brought seasonal definition
to the opera calendar and dramaturgical distinction to the
identity of each theater. It heightened competition. It
introduced a large number of young noblemen and women
to the phenomenon of opera. It brought increased status to
stars from nearby courts and new levels of competition
between theater owners for their services. Stage scenery was
described in respectful detail in many memoirs.

Much of this increase in activity was indirectly prompted
by the rise of the Holy League  a political alliance
supported by the papacy to redress the Ottoman penetration
of the Hungarian plains. The necessity of tactical planning
brought together representatives from many states and the
leaders of many ground troops (1683). The defense of
Krakow and Vienna against the Turks and paganism
(1684) raised the historical profile of Central and Eastern
Europe and the political power of the Polish ruler Jan
Sobieski. It placed Venice in the exalted position of coordi-
nator of military affairs, or so the Venetians believed. While
all official acts of alliance involved the Ducal Palace, many
of the most critical discussions took place in theater boxes
and at private entertainments.

In the first years of the decade, the Grimani tried to keep
the older SS. Giovanni e Paolo and the new San Giovanni
Grisostomo on an equal footing. Both theaters were host to
numerous works which portrayed the triumphs of military
leaders of antiquity by staging mock battles, by bringing
heroes and heroines onto the stage in carriages pulled by
prisoners of war, and by portraying palaces and their grounds
in exquisite detail. Many began or ended with coronation
scenes. Both theaters courted dignitaries from Saxony and
the Holy Roman Empire. Though new, humble Sant' Angelo
was, by contrast, a theater drawn to depictions of sorcery
and magic and to naval battles. The latter were drawn from
fictional elaborations of Greek mythology involving boats
bobbing on rough seas, shipwrecks, and pirates. Sant' Angelo
was, in short, a theater emphasizing the world-view of the

Venetian sailor. It was the most active theater of the decade
(Figure 21).

The Venetians made financial commitments to the
international cause that would be heart-stopping by today's
standards. A chief vehicle for replenishing its coffers was
to sell titles of nobility. New nobles, many of whom hed
grown rich through trade, were less accustomed to the
legends of antiquity than they were attuned to the exploration
of new territory. This affected the literature on which new
operas were based. Roman history remained fertile ground
at the Grimani theaters, as did Greek mythology at
Sant'Angelo. The subjects treated in other venues were
generally more frivolous. New currents stirred. Among the
most important were subjects from antiquity mediated by
recent French tragedy, on the one hand, and topics fashioned
from Teutonic, Slavic, and other Northern European
histories, on the other.

The 1680s saw the culmination of the careers of
Pallavicino and Legrenzi. There was a fundamental differ-
ence in the sources of their moral support: Pallavicino
divided his time between Venice and Dresden. He cemented
important links between the two musical establishments that
dated back to the long tenure of Heinrich Schiitz and his
contacts with Monteverdi. Legrenzi was heavily patronized
by the French and by Italian dukes with French sympathies.
Yet neither of these sets of involvements represented the core
alliances of the moment  with commanders, generals, and
field marshals who were primarily from German-speaking
lands. In terms of the music itself, it was generally San
Salvatore (whose patrons leaned to the French side of this
dichotomy) whose singers merited the highest praise. The
Grimani theaters scurried to recruit singers from the courts
whose leaders it sought to attract. It excelled at spectacle.

The increase in the number of productions brought great-
er formality to the collective profile of productions. The four
major theaters went head to head with openings immediately
after Christmas. They presented roughly comparable numbers
of works. As competition escalated, the more marginal
theaters spread out into earlier and later periods of the
theatrical year, with openings in late November and the
end of Carnival.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 137

C Sant'Angelo
San Cassiano

@ San Gio. Grisostomo
GSS. Gio. e Paolo

@ San Moise
@ San Salvatore
@ Other
FIGURE 21. Comparison of theatrical activity in the 1670s and the 1680s.
Of the 89 operas reported here, 33 (37 per cent) are A burgeoning number of avvisi and diplomatic records

survived by a score of some kind. The declining rate of _ in the 1680s speaks to the pivotal position of the decade in
survival reflects the discontinuation of the ContariniCodices European history, and to the increase in surveillance which
(from1685). The increased presence of important visitors inevitably accompanied troubled times. This is the first
and talented singers stimulated a concomitant increase in decade from which long runs of avvisi survive. Dates are
the number of meta-operas (32), few of which survive. thus more secure than for earlier times.

The 1680s: Chronology

1680/1 L'Odoacre* Music by Giovanni Varischino!
[ODOVACAR]
A dramma per musica Text by Novello Bonis?
rT Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1680-01-04~
a Dedicated to Leonida Zarabella, Noble of Padua

OOo In the annals of Roman decline, the Ostrogothic chief Odovacar, king of the Heruls/Eruli, deposed the
last indigenous emperor in 476. He then made a pact with the Eastern emperor Xenon/Zeno. Odovacar
conquered Dalmatia, which by 1680 had long been a territory of the Venetian Republic. This account
stressed his Roman encounters and the subsequent opposition of Theodoric, the Gothic king of Italy.

' Varischino was Legrenzi's nephew.
? Bonis was a Venetian dramatist.

> The connection between librettist and patron is explained in a note to the dear reader: Bonis's son Dario was in the service of Zarabella.
Groppo (MS, p. 95) points out that a third version of the libretto lacked mention of the theater and was dedicated to Pietro Pisani and Pietro
Contarini (on this, see the note for Tomiri, 1680/4).

The events related are similar to those recounted in Genserico (1669). Prior to the invasion of Italy, the Heruli and the Goths both held territory
north of the Black Sea.

138 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Libretti for this work were dedicated on both 4 January and 4 February 1679. Both dates must be M.V.
to agree with the title-page date 1680. Odoacre was a celebrated work which enjoyed performances
in Bologna, Verona, Milan, Treviso, Vicenza, Udine, and Naples between 1680 and 1684. It was also
performed in Perugia and in Reggio (both 1687), in the latter case with a cast that included Pier Francesco
Tosi in the role of Theodoric.

A Scores in D-AN; I-Vnm; arias in I-MOe, Tn (1679), Vqs
Listed as Galvani SAng 7; Bonlini 175; Groppo 178; Alm 252, 253

1680/2 Il ratto delle Sabine Music by Pier Simone Agostini
[THE RAPE OF THE SABINE WOMEN]
A dramma per musica Text by Giacomo Francesco Bussani'
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1680-01-17
& Dedicated to Ranuccio II Farnese, Duke of Parma'
 The mythical Romulus helped to populate Rome through his rape of the Sabine women. // ratto delle

Sabine opened on 17 January 1680 (CO; I-MOas A). It had been greatly anticipated (CO) but the
production was significantly behind schedule." At the end of 1679 the Grimani brothers had considered
engaging another composer to set the third act.' The duke of Mantua remained in Venice after the
departure of his family in order to see the premiere (I-Rvat A, NV).

 The ballo in Act One featured twenty-four dancers who depicted the Rays of the Sun. That in Act Two
presented twelve Roman abductors, whose deeds are suggested in an incision in the libretto. The first
few performances were well received because of the work's marvelous machines, beautiful scenery
and costumes, and the participation of the best musicians that exist (CO), but on balance the work
was not a success. // ratto was replaced by a revival of J/ Vespasiano (1680/3; I-MOas A).

 Giuseppe Maria Donati sang in the role of Romolo, with Gio. Francesco Grossi (Ostilio), Alessandro
Girardini (Appio), Francesco Ballarini (Zacio), Cattarina Angiola Botteghi (7ullia), Antonio Fontana
(Formenti; Servio), Anna Maria Scarlatti (Emilia), Francesco de Castris (Cesarino),"? and Tomaso
Boni (Lesbo). A letter from de Castris (Il Cecchino) describes much discord among the singers 
Ballarini (esteemed), Grossi (Siface.. .not receiving his 505 but instead his 150), and Donati (very

5 See US-LAu 252 (misquoted as 14 January in Sartori 16882) and 253 (Sartori 16883) respectively. There was also a version dated 20 January
1679 (Sartori 16879).

 On the Perugia performance, see Lindgren and Schmidt, Broadsides, p. 105. For Reggio, see Fabbri and Verti, Due secoli, p. 45.

7 Variants of some arias appear in a second hand in the score preserved in Turin, suggesting that the work underwent revision. The date is
added in pencil.

* Originally from Parma, Agostini led an erratic life of heroism (he was a Knight of the Golden Spur) and dissolution (in youth he was linked
to a murder plot). He was appointed maestro di cappella to the duke of Parma in 1679 but died in 1680. He had composed a prologue and
musical intermezzi for a dramatic work (// Tolomeo) given at the Venetian theater of Sant'Apollinare in 1658.

A like-named text by Nicold Minato had been set by Antonio Draghi (with contributions of the emperor Leopold I) for performance in Cortina
in 1674.

' The duke (1630-94), the elder brother of Alessandro, was related to both the Medici and the d'Este families.
"' Inter alia, an opening on the 14th was announced in NV.
 Vitali, De Castris, p. 598.

'' De Castris (c. 1650-1724) was said to be the best paid musician at the Medici court, where he entered the chamber of Prince Ferdinando
in 1685. He was on cordial terms with the Grand Prince and a skillful negotiator with patrons. A favorite of Legrenzi's, he seems to have been
one of the first singers to demand that roles be modified and arias be changed to suit him. Some of the substitute arias were his own settings.
An anonymous biography of the prince said the singer was pit femmina che uomo (Kirkendale, Court Musicians, pp. 437-441).

fi

 1680a
1680/3

ry

1680/4

MI

&s
O@E

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 139

good). The name of Ascanio Belli (liked by the nobility) does not appear in the cast list.'* Margarita
Salicola, whose name is also absent, had not yet arrived when de Castris's letter was written.'

Scores in I-Bc, Vnm; arias in B-Bc; I-MOe, Rvat, Tn (1679), Vqs
Listed as Galvani SGG 3; Bonlini 176; Groppo 179; Alm 254

Damira placata. Cf. Suppl. 5c.

Il Vespasiano Music by Carlo Pallavicino
[VESPASIANUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1680-02-10~

Dedicated to Giovanni Battista Tosio, Abbot of Asolo

This revival of the inaugural work for San Giovanni Grisostomo (1678/2) appears to have replaced
the production of / ratto delle Sabine (1680/2) on short notice (I-MOas A). All of the theaters were
said to have started their second operas by 10 February, but this revival could have opened sooner.
The cast matched that of J/ ratto delle Sabine in featuring Antonio Fontana (Formenti) in the title
role, with Cattarina Angiola Botteghi (Arricida), Alessandro Girardini (A7tilio), Anna Maria Scarlatti
(Sergio), Francesco Ballarini (Licinio), and Francesco de Castris (Gesilla).' The music and text differed
somewhat from the first version of the work.

Scores in I-MOe (1678), Vnm (1680); arias (1678): I-MOe, Vlevi, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SGG 4; Bonlini 180; Groppo 183; Alm 259

Tomiri Music by Angelo Vitali
[THOMyRIS]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Medolago
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1680-01-30

Dedicated to Giovanni Francesco Morosini'*

In the text, Thomyris/Tomiri, the queen of the Massagetes, threatened the Persian ruler Cyrus, but she
had to prove her masculine capabilities as an Amazon warrior. The libretto was dedicated on 29 January
[16]79, which must be M. V. to agree with the title-page date of 1680. The work may have opened on

'' See Saunders, Repertoire, p. 449, Saunders's coverage of casts, like Termini's (Pollarolo), is based on Francesco Caffi's notes in I-Vnm,

Cod. It. IV-748 ( = 10466).

'S Vitali, De Castris, p. 599. Vitali's account refutes Galvani's indication (/ teatri, p. 122) that the same work had been given anonymously

in Bologna in 1679.

Cf. Caffi, Appunti, f. 50. Vitali (Un cantante, p. 570) disputes the likelihood that de Castris actually sang in the role, which he said had
originally been assigned to Anna Maria Scarlatti (the sister of Alessandro). He notes that Gesilla's arias in I-MOe (Mus. G.298, F.898, and
1547) are incompatible with the vocal range found in other roles taken by de Castris.

'' Angelo Vitali was a priest from Modena.

'S A Venetian noble and a procurator of San Marco, later doge. He was born on the Morean peninsula and was to be the greatest defender of
the Venetian Republic in the later decades of the seventeenth century.

140 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

the 30th, when Vettor Grimani was a participant in a fistfight after a performance.'? The work was in
progress by 3 February 1680 (I-MOas A). The cast included Marco Tomasini.

A Arias in I-Vqs"!
Listed as Galvani SCas 23; Bonlini 179; Groppo 182; Alm 257, 258

1680/5 Il don Chisciot della Mancia Music attributed to Carlo Fedeli
[DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Marco Morosini
im Performed at the Teatro di Cannaregio SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a prologue, intermezzo, and ballo SORTING DATE: 1680-02-03~
& Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua
 The story, based on Cervantes's Don Quixote, was situated in Barcelona.> While no earlier musical

dramatization of Don Quixote is known, the subject was popular over the next 250 years. Don Chisciot
was in production by 3 February 1680 (I-MOas A).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani CR 2; Bonlini 177; Groppo 180; Alm 255

1680/6 Berenice vendicativa Music by Domenico Freschi
[BERENICE THE VINDICTIVE]

A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Maria Rapparini'

Performed at the Villa Contarini (Piazzola) SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)

With II cittadino amante della patria overo il Tello* SORTING DATE: 1680-11-08

& Berenice, the sister of Mithridates, was the widow of Ariarates, the king of Cappadocia. Her older son

had been killed by his brother. Nicomedes, the king of Bithynia, offered insincerely to secure her second
son in the line of succession if she would marry him. She responded by promising to marry the most
ferocious of her captains. This proved to be Nicomedes.

Oo Berenice was first performed on 8 November 1680 (MG; I-MOas). Its production represented the apex
of the colossal Baroque mentality in Venetian opera. It featured twenty cori, 100 damsels, 100 attacking

']-Vas, CX, Busta 37, entry of 5 Febraro 1679 [M.V.], addressed to Pietro Contarini, which reads in part ...attrovandovi la sera dei 30 del
passata nel Teatro a San Cassano doppo terminata I' opera il Nob. H. Vettor Grimani mascherato habbiate voi s. Piero [Contarini] con impropria
dannabilissima forma, presa occatione d'altercare seco. ..sij de poi trapasatto dalla altercationi alle offese mentre struditto un stillo del quale
era armato ben che si attrovase in habito di maschera...con esso in colpo ferendolli nel braccio sinistro....

?1-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Pietro Paolo de Bonis, Busta 1796, entry of 21 July 1705; Tomasini wished to have a notary affirm this appearance.
2! See Dubowy, Arie und Konzert, p. 319.

 Given as Don Chissiot in the libretto.

3 A Venetian nobleman.

4 Il trionfo di Venere.

5 Given that Fedeli's son Ruggiero was taken into the service of the Saxon duke by Carlo Pallavicino in 1687, it is not inconceivable that
this work was a model for Stefano Benedetto Pallavicino's Un pazzo ne fa cento, ovvero Don Chisciotte, set by G. A. Ristori for the Saxon
court in 1726.

6 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 338f, lists settings through 1916.

2 Rapparini was active in Bologna, where in subsequent years he had involvements with the Teatro Malvezzi. Another Rapparini, Antonio,
sang at the court of Lorraine in 1703.

8 [I cittadino (Suppl. 4a), the libretto for which appears with that of Berenice, was an operetta of political import on a text by Rapparini.

 The printer added his own note to the libretto praising the singular poet for having reached new heights in this work. Drama scholars
generally cite Racine's Berenice (1670) as model. It was also the basis for Handel's uncompleted Tito (HWV AS, 1731); Handel's Berenice
(HWV 38, 1737) was derived from Salvi's text for Le gare di politica e d'amore (1711/6).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 141

ILLUSTRATION 8 (at right). Incision from the libretto for // cittadino
amante, ovvero II Tello, given with Berenice vendicativa (1680/6)
at Piazzola. The singer sits with two violinists and cellist while
conveying the reflections of Tello, who gazes into space above.
(Ca' Goldoni, 59.A.266/9.)

ILLUSTRATION 9 (below). Pageantry associated with Berenice
vendicativa, as shown in the libretto. (Ca' Goldoni, 59.4.266/8.)


142 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

ILLUSTRATION 10 (above). Domenico
Rossetti's representation of a messenger
and the heroine at the palace gate in Bere-
nice vendicativa. Soldiers and cavaliers
populate the thoroughfare seen in the
background. (Ca' Goldoni, 59.A.266/8.)

ILLUSTRATION 11 (right). Depiction of a
boar hunt from the libretto of Berenice
vendicativa. (Ca' Goldoni, 59.A.266/8.)


OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 143

soldiers, 100 mounted men, 40 footmen, six mounted trumpeters, six drummers, six standard-bearers,
six herald trumpeters, six players of flauti grandi, twelve young girls (cittelle) playing Turkish
instruments, five others playing in a concerto di flautini (recorder consort), six more playing harpsichords,
six pages, three sergeants, twelve hunters, twelve stable boys, seven coachmen for the victory scene,
and six others positioned along the thoroughfare.

The production involved two lions, led by two little Turks (turchetti), two elephants, led by two more
little Turks, four horses to pull Berenice's victory chariot, twelve horses to pull the six carts of prisoners
and spoils as well as six chariots in the general milieu (corso). A wild boar was pursued in a hunt in
Act One. At the end of Act Three, a globe opened into a machine to introduce Rapparini's patriotic
operetta, called II cittadino amante della patria overo il Tello, which consisted of a prologue and three
acts, all very short. (See Illustrations 8-11.)

The Mercure, which devoted much attention to Piazzola, noted that Berenice was performed from
six until eleven.* In comparison to Le amazzoni, which had been given in the preceding year, the
Mercure reported, Berenice surpassed it greatly for the magnificence of the entrees and for the richness
of the costumes.... Everything in this opera was different from what was used for the opening of Le
amazzoni. Thus there were new costumes, new scenery, and new musicians.?! On account of its
incomparable quality, the new production drew the majority ofnobles from Venice and many other
places (I-Rvat A). It continued in production, after feste di dame on the 9th and 10th, for approximately
two weeks.

 As originally envisioned by Marco Contarini, his cycle of festini would last for eight days. He offered
each attendee a room in his huge palace for 400 /ire for the duration of the cycle.*> During the week
ending on the 23rd, when the work was now termed famous, the production came to an abrupt halt
when an overhead storage room for the horse-drawn carriages collapsed. This destroyed the carriages
and frightened the horses (I-MOas A).TM It also damaged the theater (I-Rvat A). By its instant fame,
however, Berenice completely eclipsed the autumn theater season in Venice.

A Score in I-Vnm
Listed as Sartori 3977
1680/7 L'amante muto loquace Music attributed to Domenico Freschi
[THE MUTE LOVER WHO WAS LOQUACIOUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Niccole Leonardi
&A Performed at the Villa Contarini (Piazzola) SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without known incidental items** SORTING DATE: 1680-11-10
@ Dedicated to Ladies and Gentlemen
 Rosaura, a Neapolitan princess whose parents died as she reached adulthood, was in the custody of

Policlea, her former nurse. Ardimiro, a Neapolitan prince captivated by her, feigned muteness to gain
 Depuis six heures jusqu'a onze may refer to French rather than Venetian time, given Piazzola's strong inclination toward French culture
in general. (In Venetian 24-hour time, the performance would have begun before daybreak. In French 12-hour time, it would have ended before
sunset. Iconographical representations suggest that the performance was given in daylight (see Song and Season, Ch. 3.)

3! Le Mercure galant, Fevrier 1681, pp. 213-49 passim; quoted in Pallade veneta, pp. 344-46.
 The duke of Mantua was in Piazzola from the 9th or earlier until the 13th to attend performances (I-Rvat NV).
3 A-Wn CO, Vol. 1680, entry of 26 Ottobre.

4 caduta una stanza, ove si conservavano le carrozze, che comparivano in scena, le rovind, e fra l'altre ne fracass6 una tutta guarnita di

punto in aria, onde |'opera non fu piu recitata. In the Mercure account, there were to be four performances after the first, but because la
chute d'un batiment depuis peu construit empecha d'executer..., the production was suspended.

35 Not listed in the main bibliographies of Venetian opera. (Ivanovich discusses the work in his Memorie teatrali, Ch. XVII.) The libretti for
some works produced at Piazzola (including this one) were printed in Padua. The others (preserved in I-Vcg) were printed on the estate's own
presses.

*6 But see Fidalbo e Armindo (Suppl. 5a).

144 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

entrance to the place in which she lived. The libretto suggests extensive use of mime. L 'amante was
first given on 10 November 1680 and may have been repeated on the 12th (I-MOas).

BS It was performed in the second theater (the Teatro delle Vergini) at Marco Contarini's country estate
as part of the ongoing festival for ladies and gentlemen. The libretto for L 'amante was exceptionally
richly illustrated.** Each act was prefaced by a carefully worked incision representing the staging, which
in turn seems to have given an idealized view of the life of the fanciulle resident at Piazzola. The incision
for Act One shows several pairs of girls at their looms, that for Act Two features a garden, and that
for Act Three a courtyard.

A Score in -Vnm
Listed as Talbot 3, Sartori 1053

1680/8 L'Er ginda Music anonymous
[ERGINDA]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonia Fontana'
A Performed at the Villa Contarini (Piazzola) SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With a prologue and intermedi SORTING DATE: 1680-11-10~
& Dedicated to Marco Contarini
 Having inherited the Iberian throne, Erginda was pursued by the Armenian gentleman Orontes for her

rare beauty and virtue, and by Daliso, the rich but less elegant duke of Accalla.* The title page was
printed with the date 168_, emended to 1680. The year specification in the dedication date 10
November 1684 can be considered erroneous not only because the score is dated 1680 but also because
after 1680 there is no mention of the use of horses [required here] at Piazzola. November 1684 proved
to be an exceptionally rainy month which brought much flooding to the Veneto and no further activity
to Piazzola.

A Score in ]-Vnm
No known bibliographical listing*

1680/9 Le amazzoni nelle isole fortunate Music by Carlo Pallavicino
[THE AMAZONS IN THE FORTUNATE ISLES]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Maria Piccioli
A Performed at the Villa Contarini (Piazzola) SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With chorus and balli SORTING DATE: 1680-11-11
> Like the libretto for Erginda, this one gave the year 168_ on the title-page. It carried a generic date of li___168_.

3 This is the case, at least, with the copy in I-Vcg (shelfmark 59.A.266/7).
 I-Veg, 59.A.166/7 et al. Libretto (printed in Piazzola) not listed in bibliographies of Venetian opera.
Sartori suggests that it was by Carlo Fedeli, which is not unreasonable but is conjectural.

' Antonia Fontana appears to have been one of the residents of the Luogo delle Vergini at Piazzola. Aurelio Aureli had composed a favola
called Erginda for the Accademia degl'Imperfetti in 1652 (Sartori 9082). It was set to music by Gasparo Sartorio. She referred to the dedicatee
as a semi-god and identified herself as being from the ranks of your servants.

 The intermedi here all featured machines. They presented Venus and Amore ina carriage pulled by swans, Amore and Paris in another carriage,
and crowds of hunters, maidens, pages, and cavallieri looking on.

* The story seems to be a thinly disguised variant of the legend of Zenobia and Rhadamisthos, but the names employed to convey it (Erginda,
the court of Accalla) hint at establishment of Visigothic rule in Spain from the fall of Rome until the Arabic conquest.

 The 1680 date is echoed in Fontana's dedication of the libretto for the opera morale Gioseffo (1688), in which she says that the autrice of
the new work was the same as that for Erginda, given in Piazzola in 1680. Thus it seems possible that the current text was indeed written in
1680.

5 Sartori 9083 (copy in I-Vcg, 59.A.266/2; no listings appear in bibliographies of Venetian operas). This libretto was printed at Piazzola.

aO

A

 1680b
1680/10

iM

1680/11

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 145

The text for this revival of 1679/4 was undedicated. The heroic image of Amazon warriors was
continuously growing, perhaps partly in response to the original production. This performance of Le
amazzoni marked the first anniverary of Contarini's private theater. The scale on which it was produced
was again colossal, although the performance, at three and one-half hours, was much shorter than that
of Berenice (1680/6). Its participants were described as 300 actors  100 Amazon women, 100 men
disguised as Moors, and 50 mounted men, with the balance made up of other extras. At its conclusion
acarriage entirely covered with gold embroidery was pulled onto the stage by six of the most beautiful
horses ever seen. The performance was universally applauded.

Score (1679) in I-Vnm

No bibliographical listings known

Fidalbo e Armindo. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Caligola delirante Music by Giovanni Maria Pagliardi
[CALIGULA THE DELIRIOUS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Domenico Gisberti
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1680-12-11~

Dedicated to the Ladies of Venice

This revival of 1671/4 is likely to have opened during early December. In the previous decade openings
at SS. Giovanni e Paolo had generally preceded those at San Salvatore by a few days. The libretto's
designation as an autumn work would preclude an opening after Christmas.

Score in I-Vnm (1672); arias in I-Ne (Naples, 1673), Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSGP 66; Bonlini 181; Groppo 184; Alm 260

Irene e Costantino' Music attributed to Antonio Giannettini
[IRENE AND CONSTANTINE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Andrea Rossini*
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1680-12-13

Dedicated to Giovanni Battista Mora, N.V.

Constantine VI ruled the Eastern Roman Empire under the regency of his mother, Irene, from 776 until
1790, after which she was deposed. She was recalled as joint ruler in 1792, but Constantine won great
disfavor for his ruthlessness, divorce, and remarriage (795), whereupon Irene reclaimed the throne.
Constantine's dissolute life and misdeeds are portrayed here. Jrene was reported to have opened
admirably on the 12th (I-Rvat NV) or 13th of December 1680 (I-MOas A). The title-page of the libretto
is dated 1681. A ballo in Act I featured women at their bath, offering one example of the provocative
nature of the operas performed during this year.

Score in I-Vnm; arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSal 33; Bonlini 183; Groppo 186; Alm 263, 264

In April 1680, for example, the wife of the French ambassador and a female friend, dressed as Amazons, invaded the ducal banquet on the
feast of St. Mark (I-Moas A). In February 1682 the Moroccan ambassador was entertained at Versailles by a hunt involving princesses and
gentlewomen dressed as Amazons (I-MOas A, Busta 5273 [olim 118], entry of 21 February 1682).

' Le Mercure galant, Fevrier 1681. By the reckoning of the Mercure this was the second performance of Le amazzoni; it occurred on the
10th or the 11th. The events described in the avvisi preserved in Modena suggest that other events completely occupied the 8th, 9th, and 10th.

* A Venetian cavalier.

146 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1680/12 La Flora' Music by Antonio Sartorio, Marc' Antonio Ziani
[FLORA]
A melodramma Text by Novello Bonis
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1680-12-26~
& Dedicated to Giovanni Battista Mora, N.V.
 Flora, the Roman goddess of flowers, was in this case a beautiful Roman noblewoman. As Sant' Angelo's

first opera, Flora is likely to have opened on 26 or 27 December 1680. After years of intermittent
illness, Sartorio died on the 30th. It fell to Ziani to complete the work. The title-page of the libretto
was dated 1681.

A Arias in I-Bca, Rvat (prima), Vc, Vnm, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SAng 8; Bonlini 185; Groppo 188; Alm 266

1681/1 Dionisio Music by Petronio Franceschini* (Act 1),
ovvero La Virtuti trionfante del Vizio Gian Dom. Partenio (Sinf.; Acts 2, 3)
[DIONYSIOS, OR VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT OVER VICE]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
ry Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1681-01-13

ia) Dedicated to Ernst August, Duke of Brunswick*!
7) Dionysios, a fourth-century king of Syracuse, was characterized by ancient historians as the first

potentate to seek glory rather than personal power. Noris depicted his court as a school. ..for discipline,
especially for the moral education of the ruler himself. Slighting Franceschini, Noris's note to the reader
praises Partenio's suave sweetness...founded on his intelligence. Dionisio was first performed on
13 January 1681 (I-MOas A), one day after the dedication of the first version of its libretto.

A Arias in I-Vc, Vgs
Listed as Galvani SSGP 67; Bonlini 184; Groppo 187; Alm 265

 1681a L' Ulisse in Feaccia. Cf. Suppl. 5c.
1681/2 Il Creso Music by Giovanni Legrenzi
[CROESUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
r Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1681-02-08
@ Dedicated to Giovanni Battista Mora, N.V.

* Mora is here identified as a Patrizio rather than a Nobil Huomo.

 Franceschini had died on 4 December 1680 (Vitali, De Castris, p. 598), just after completing the first act of this work. He was 30 years
old. A young Bolognese composer, Franceschini had aroused the enmity of Legrenzi (see Riepe, Arciconfraternita, Document B14, p. 496,
of 9 December 1680, noting that Franceschini had gone to Venice at the invitation of the Grimani). Partenio wrote the opening sinfonia and
set the two later acts of the opera.

5! Ernst August had succeeded his brother, Johann Friedrich, in 1679 as Archbishop of Osnabriick. His love of music was well known. In 1689
he built an opera house at Hanover.

* There is no evidence to link this work with a phantom title, Marcello in Siracusa (Suppl. 1) mentioned in Bonlini's Appendix (No. 27) for
a revival in 1680. The work in question, also on a text by Noris, was first performed in Boretti's setting at SS. Giovanni e Paolo (1670/1).
It had a significant number of revivals in northern Italy over the next decade. The libretto was published in Venice ostensibly in 1680 (Sartori
14718) and could be related to the production given in Fano in 1680, for which the libretto (Sartori 14725) was also published in Venice.

Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613) reported owning a score.

eX)

1681/3

iO)

A

 1681b
 1681c
 1681d
 1681e

1681/4

4

54 Lydia was especial

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 147

Croesus, the last king [560-546 BC] of ancient Lydia, was defeated by the Persian Cyrus the Great
[559-530 BC].*4 Here the aspirations of the young Persian prince Aridenos (who seemed more an Adonis
than a Mars) were highlighted. // Creso had opened admirably by 8 February 1681 (I-MOas A).
According to its libretto (which was obviously written in anticipation of the event), the music was
performed with great perfection (tanta perfettione). Tomaso Boni sang as Lenos.>

Arias in GB-Lbl, Ob; I-Bca, Rvat, Vqs*

Listed as Galvani SGG 6; Bonlini 188; Groppo 191; Alm 269

Pompeo Magno in Cilicia Music by Domenico Freschi
[POMPEY THE GREAT IN CILICIA]

A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1681-02-08

Dedicated to Francesco Vendramin, N.V.

The victories of Pompey brought Roman rule to lands previously governed by Greece. Pompey passed
through Cilicia (part of the present Turkish mainland north of Cyprus) en route to Antioch, where he
established Syria as a Roman province in 64 BC, and Judaea, which became a Roman dependency.
In contrast to Minato's text for Cavalli (1666/8), Pompey's defeat of the corsairs was emphasized.
Pompeo Magno was in progress by 8 February 1681 (I-MOas A) and may have opened earlier, since
its libretto had been dedicated on 22 January 1681. Aureli's dedication praised the marvelous and
singular music of Don Domenico Freschi and the skill of the impresario, Francesco Santurini. One
innovation in Pompeo was the use of a ballo to accompany the raising of the curtain. The opening scene
depicted slaves of various nationalities in the harem of Selinunte, the extrovert Greek ruler of Sicily.
Score in I-Vnm;* arias in I-Vqs

Listed as Galvani SAng 9; Bonlini 187; Groppo 190; Alm 268

Untitled peripatetic mascherata. Cf. Suppl. 8.
Echo ravwvivato. Cf. Suppl. Sa.
Untitled serenata. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

La felicita regnante. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Ermelinda Music by Domenico Freschi**
[HERMELINDE]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Maria Piccioli
Performed at the Villa Contarini (Piazzola) SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1681-11-11

This undedicated story, which dealt more with the role of the virtuous wife than with the details as set
forth by Morosini and Fedeli in their Ermelinda (1679/5), recounted the tortuous path of Hermelinde,
vigorously protected by her father, Aristaios, and Ormond, her would-be lover, towards their eventual

ly important for its mineral wealth and for the development of gold and silver coinage.

55 He was the only singer identified (Saunders, Repertoire, p. 449).

* Giovanni Rossi possessed a copy of the score (see I-Vnm, Cod. It. V II-1613).
57 Facsimile edn., IOB, 65.

58 Sartori suggests that the music was set by Carlo Fedeli (who had connections with Piazzola in 1685), but Freschi is cited as the composer

in the libretto.

148 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

marriage. The performance of Ermelinda was intended for 11 November 1681, the feast of St. Martin
(NV). As soon as he arrived in Venice (during the week ending on the 15th), Prince Josef [Karol]
Lubomirski went to Piazzola with six attendants and a host of Venetian nobles to see the opera (I-MOas
A), where a large number of important personages (cavalieri soggetti grandi) were said to be gathered
for the production (GB-Lpro).

A Score, some parts in I-Vnm
No bibliographical listing known

1681/5 L'Olimpia vendicata Music by Domenico Freschi
[OLYMPIA VINDICATED]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
rd Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1681-11-28
& Dedicated to Anton Ulrich, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbiittel!
 In this fanciful libretto (based on Ariosto's Orlando furioso), the Dutch princess Olympia fell in love

with the Irish king Obert. The ballo in Act I involved four ibernesi and concluded with a debate between
two boatmen and two boat-builders. The ballo in Act II featured six fishermen smoking pipes on the
shore of a lake. This production opened on 28 November 1681. The libretto for Olimpia had been
dedicated on the 20th. The duke had arrived during the week ending 8 November and was feted by
the Venetian government on the 24th. The last performance was on 3 January 1682 (I-MOas A).

OF The Florentine agent Matteo di Teglia, informing the Medici court of activities in Venice during Carnival,
singled out this work for its great attendance (gran concorso) and for the presence of the dukes of Mantua,
Wolfenbiittel, and Brunswick. In a report of the 29th the same correspondent labeled exorbitant
the expense of making musicians and singers of the first rank come here, not to mention the sumptuous
costumes and scenery that the owners of the theaters provide to compete with each other. Scarlatti's
setting of the same text had its premiere in Naples on 23 December 1685. When it was given there,
first at the Royal Palace and then at the Teatro di San Bartolomeo, this work was described as famous
and cited for the great exquisiteness of the performers and...the beauty of the scenery.

fi Scores in F-Pn, I-Vnm; arias in I-Tn (prima), Vqs
Listed as Galvani SAng 10; Bonlini 189; Groppo 192; Alm 270

* The Lubomirski had built up large land holdings in Poland over the previous century. According to the report in GB-Lpro, SPV, Series 101,
Box 86, dated 14 Novembre 1681, the duke of Mantua set out to see the production but was denied the satisfaction because of transportation
difficulties.

 Sartori 9138 is dated 1680. No libretto for 1681 is listed (the one used here is I-Vcg, 59.A.266/3). No production can be associated with
a 1682 reprint (Sartori 9139), although the item in question was printed for performance at Piazzola.

' Anton Ulrich (1633-1714) was a significant patron of both music and art. He collected many musical manuscripts and also lent paintings
from his collection to other courts (e.g. that of Prague; see Schiirer, Prag, p. 225). He composed songs and wrote texts for works performed
at court.

 Matteo di Teglia (I-Fas, Lettere dei Residenti, Filza 3041), cited in Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, 56.

% I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 44, entries of 8 and 29 November. The duke was received by the doge on the 1 5th (Baschet, Histoire, p. 494).
Staying in the palace formerly occupied by the duke of Mantua, he remained in Venice well into the winter, was included in Christmas Eve
ceremonies at San Marco, and gave two feste di tori in the courtyard of his palace in January (I-Rvat A, various dispatches).

 Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, p. 19.

6 Divengono esorbitanti le spese in far venire musici e cantanti della prima riga, oltre gli abiti sontuosi e scene che si fanno a gara dag] interessati
di questi teatri (Molmenti, Storia, III/1, 160, citing I-Fas, Lettere dei Residenti, Filza 3041, f. 617).

$ | Ja gran esquisitezza de' rappresentanti [e]...la vaghezza delle scene (Griffin, Gazzetta di Napoli, Doc. 17; 4 January 1686). The abundant
supply of candies and chocolates was also noted.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 149

1681/6 Flavio Cuniberto" Music attributed to Gian Domenico Partenio
[FLAVIUS CUNIBERT]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1681-11-29
& Dedicated to Carlo Vicenzo Iovanelli'

The tyrant Flavius Cunibert, the Lombard king of Italy in the late seventh century, fell in love with
Theodata, the daughter of his councillor Hugo. He despised his virtuous wife, Hermelinde, whom he
eventually murdered. Much of this drama hinged on the affairs of his councillor Lothar, who was stabbed
by an unknown agent later shown to be the son of Hugo.

Ooo Flavio Cuniberto opened on 29 November 1681 (I-MOas A). The final performance was on 6 January
1682. Initially it was received with complete satisfaction (I-MOas A). The original cast featured
Domenico Cecchi (I] Cortona) in the title role, with Lugretia Fichiboni (Ermelinda), Giuseppe Canavese
(Lotario), Antonio Fontana (Formenti; Ugone), Margarita Salicola (Emilia), Clarice Gigli (Teodata),
Francesco de Castris (Guido), Tomaso Boni (Bleso), and Paolo [Pietro Paolo Scandalibeni?] (Vitige).

OR At the end of one performance (apparently that of 21 December), the final curtain was dropped before
all the performers had left the stage. The wooden beam from which it was suspended fell, injuring the
famous singer Domenico Cecchi (Il Cortona) on the head, and apparently caused a concussion. It
also injured an unidentified cantatrice on the shoulder. Cecchi was unable to continue in the title role.
Clemente Hader (Clementino), an English singer who had recently left Venice for an engagement
in Vienna, was summoned to return as a replacement. Upon his arrival in Venice he was refused
permission to perform ona public stage (I-Rvat NV). After giving private recitals for the duke of Mantua
and the prince of Brunswick, he set off once more for Vienna. Someone originally cast in a lesser role
took Cecchi's part. Cecchi was still recuperating on 3 January [1682].

- A revised version of the text set by Scarlatti was performed in Naples on 13 November 16887! and at
Pratolino (Florence) on 6 September 1702. The text for Handel's setting (Flavio, re di Longobardi;
HWV 16) of 1723 diverged from Mancia's Roman setting of 1696.

A Score (I, III) in A-Wn; arias in I-MOe, Vqs'>
Listed as Galvani SGG 7; Bonlini 192; Groppo 195; Alm 274

7 Jovanelli served the Holy Roman Empire.

* Saunders, Repertoire, p. 450.

 It was reported on 27 December (I-Rvat NV) that Cortona (Cecchi) was sufficiently recuperated to believe that he would be able to resume
singing on stage two weeks hence.

This commentary is pieced together from various reports among which there are minor discrepancies: I-MOas, Avvisi da Venezia, Busta
5272 (entry of 27 Decembre 1681) and 5273 (entry of 3 Gennaro 1681 M.V.); also I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 46, entries of 13 and 27 Decembre
1681 and 3 Gennaro 1682. Hader was also known as von Hadersberg.

7 See Griffin Doc. 57.
 R.L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 192. The arias in D-MUs are from the Florentine performance.
% On Handel's debts to Italian libretti see Bianconi and La Face Bianconi, / libretti, passim.

TM Tn fact, the same role in the 1682 version had been taken by Clarice Gigli, who, in the analogous spot, had sung the aria Costanza, gradita
costanza.

*5 The recently discovered score for Acts One and Three is discussed in Dubowy, Partenio's Flavio. The scores for Flavio Cuniberto in
1-Be and I-MOe are both from the 1688 production of the like-named work by Gabrielli (see Dubowy, Arie und Konzert, p. 311).

150

1681/7

mM

OR

1681/8

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Il PausaniaTM Music by Giovanni Legrenzi
[PAUSANIAS]

A dramma per musica Text by Girolamo Frisari
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1681-12-06

Dedicated to Giovanni Battista Mora, N.V.

The fifth-century Spartan ruler Pausanias, commanding the fleet ofan allied Hellenic League, captured
Byzantium. Although disliked for his boastful nature, he escaped punishment several times and eventually
become the object of a hero-worship cult. Although this account showed his weakness to be his love
for Erinda (daughter of the king of Argos, who had been promised to Pausanias's brother, Eumenes),
its visual representation emphasized power (Illustration 13).

The libretto dedicated on 8 December 1681 (US-LAu) may have been a revised version, since the first
performance is reported to have occurred on the 6th (I-MOas A). The production was suspended from
28 December through at least 3 January [1682] because of the fever and laryngitis of the prima donna
Margaritina' (I-MOas A; Rvat NV); the cast is otherwise unknown. When the work was produced
in Parma in 1692, the singers included Giuseppe Scaccia (Pausania), Fr. Antonio Pistocchi (Eumene),
Carlice Beni (Erinda), Elena Garofalo (/drena), and Diamante Scarabelli (Rosaura).

Ina season of productions dominated by images of power, Pausania marked the high-water line. The
hero, undoubtedly intended to represent the might of the Venetian Republic, was drawn to gigantic
proportions in the frontispiece of the libretto.

Arias in B-Be; D-B; I-Rvat, Tn (prima opera...1682), Vnm, Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSal 34; Bonlini 190; Groppo 193; Alm 271

Bassiano Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino

ovvero II] maggior impossibile possibile*
[BASSIANUS, OR THE MOST IMPOSSIBLE THING MADE POSSIBLE]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1681-12-08

Dedicated to Prince Josef Karl Lubomirski*!

Septimius Bassianus was the original name of Caracalla, the co-emperor of Rome (with his brother
Geta) from 198 to 211; he ruled solo from 211 until 217. The glory and military might of ancient Rome
were proclaimed here. The work opened in the salon of a Roman academy. The contrast between Greek
power as portrayed in Pausania and Roman power as portrayed in Bassiano could not be more striking.
Bassiano opened on 8 December 1681 (I-MOas A). At the end of November it had been reported that
Prince Lubomirski wished to remain in Venice for Carnival, but his mother (the queen of Poland) refused
to make available the funds he considered necessary for the purpose (I-Rvat NV). This may have
contributed to the appearance that the staging of this opera in his honor failed to achieve its intended

6 Legrenzi was elected vice maestro di cappella at San Marco on 12 January 1681.

7' A licenza per stampa for a tragedia with this title had been issued to Gio. Domenico Breghini on 12 May 1678.

78 Apparently Margarita Salicola.

 Sartori 18220. The cast list is not given in most copies of the libretto, but apparently is given in the copy in I-MOe.

 At this time Legrenzi's customary fee for each opera he composed was 100 ungheri (see Holmes, Operatic Commissions, p. 158, citing
letters in I-Fas, [6 and 20 Dicembre 1681], from Alessandro Guasconi to the Florentine Luca degli Albizzi). Legrenzi, who was said to be
busy putting on the commedia at San Luca [i.e., the opera at San Salvatore], was expected to have grand pretentions (and thus higher salary
requests) if approached about setting an opera for Pratolino. Guasconi had been instructed to offer such a commission.

5! A Polish prince of the Holy Roman Empire.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 151

result a gift from the prince.* Other members of his party, traveling from Krakow, had not arrived
by 11 January. They were later said to have abandoned their plans to reach Venice. The prince remained
until mid-April.

RO Giuseppe Maria Donati (Gioseffino di Bavaria), who sang in the title role, had to leave the production
on 28 December because ofa touch of apoplexy (I-MOas A; Rvat NV). The production was suspended
through at least 3 January [1682]. Scarlatti's setting of the same text was to be performed in Naples
in the spring of 1694. Four other productions were given outside Venice between 1683 and 1702.

a Arias in I-MOe, Tn, Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSGP 68; Bonlini 191; Groppo 194; Alm 272, 273

1682/1 Antioco il Grande Music by Giovanni Legrenzi
[ANTIOCHOS THE GREAT]
A dramma per musica Text by Girolamo Frisari
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1682-01-09~
& Dedicated to Marquis Guido Rangoni

Antiochos Epiphanes [280-261 BC] consolidated the Seleukid empire but failed to incorporate Egypt
into it. He allowed the worship of Yahweh to continue in Jerusalem. In this work Ptolemy, seeking
peace with Antiochos, offers his sister Cleopatra in marriage. The cast included the now recuperated
Domenico Cecchi (II Cortona), Tomaso Boni, and Francesco de Castris.

 The opening of Antioco was anticipated on 3 January 1682 (I-MOas A), but Flavio did not close until
the 6th; the libretto had been dedicated on 17 December 1681. Antioco closed before 20 January,
possibly because de Castris was appearing both here and at SS. Giovanni e Paolo in what were more
or less simultaneous runs (see 1682/2).

fi Arias in GB-LbI; I-Bca, MOe, Nc, Rvat, Vlevi, Vqs*
Listed as Galvani SGG 5; Bonlini 182; Groppo 185; Alm 261, 262

1682/2 Dionisio Music by Petronio Franceschini (Act 1),
ovvero La virtu trionfante del vizio Gian Domenico Partenio (Acts 2, 3)

[DIONYSIOS OR VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT OVER VICE]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
rr Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1682-01-10~

az Dedicated to Giacomo Sandri

 This revival of 1681/1 appears to have been the other work beginning during the week following 3 January

1682, when Giuseppe Maria Donati was forced by ill health to leave the production of Bassiano (1681/8).

 A hunt was held in the Prince's honor on 6 December. A report of December 13th commented that the Prince was restrained by [lack of]
funds from doing what he wants unless he were to return to Poland, but...he wants to stay put here for all of carnival (I-Rvat, AS, NV, N.
122, f. 1033, entries by date).

 T-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 46, entry of 18 Aprile 1682.

* Bovi ostensibly took the role of Gildo (see Saunders, Repertoire, p. 449), while Cecchi, mentioned in the avviso, apparently took that
of Ptolemy/Tolomeo.

55 Groppo (MS, p. 97) notes that there were four editions of the libretto.
6 Giovanni Rossi possessed a copy of the score (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

152 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Francesco de Castris, who was otherwise engaged for the season at San Giovanni Grisostomo (1682/1),
was asked to take Donati's place as the protagonist in Dionisio.*'

A Score in I-Ve; arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSGP 69; Bonlini 197; Groppo 200; Alm 279

1682/3 Giulio Cesare trionfante Music by Domenico Freschi
[JULIUS CAESAR TRIUMPHANT]
A dramma per musica Text by Luigi Orlandi
rT Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1682-01-11
& Dedicated to Count Francesco Micoli
 Julius Caesar had been the subject of Bussani's 1676/6, set by Sartorio. The new librettist lamented

the physical constraints of the Sant' Angelo stage. He wrote that producing this work was like squeezing
the liad of Homer into a nutshell. The second act opened in a royal library where a gathering (ballo)
of philosophers took place. An illustration in the libretto portrayed such figures as Heraclitus weeping
and Democritus smiling. Giulio Cesare opened on 11 January 1682 (I-MOas A); the libretto had been
dedicated on the preceding day.

A Arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SAng 11; Bonlini 193; Groppo 196; Alm 275

1682/4 La bugia regnante Music by Gian Domenico Partenio (1),
ovvero Iphide greca Domenico Freschi (2), and Antonio Sartorio (3)
[The Reigning Liar, or Iphis the Greek Maiden]
A dramma per musica Text by Nicold Minato
11 Performed at the Teatro di Cannaregio SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and intermezzi SORTING DATE: 1682-01-18~
& Without dedicatee
Sd

This abbreviated revival of the work set by Draghi for performance in Vienna (1670) had been repeated
at the Teatro ai Saloni, Venice, in 1671 (Suppl. 7). According to Ovid, Ligdos, as he set off for battle,
instructed his pregnant wife Telethusia to give birth to a son. To hide her shame for producing a daughter,
Telethusia raised Iphis as a male. His/her actual gender was discovered when, having reached maturity,
he/she was betrothed to Ianthe, who was also fancied by an army general. The work was set in Candia.*!

oo Although a report (I-Rvat) of 7 February 1682 noted that the operas were changing, this was a short
winter season. Baili given with the work in the 1671 version depicted military exercises in the first
case and painters, sculptors, and courtesans in the second, but their nature in this version is unspecified.

57 Vitali, Un cantante, p. 571, citing correspondence of 3 January 1681 in the Bentivoglio archive, which must bear an old-style date. Vitali
places Dionisio between the San Giovanni Grisostomo productions of Antioco (1682/1) and Creso (1681/2), but these works were not given
in the same production cycle nor in the assumed order. The unambiguous dating of I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 124, is 3 Gennaro 1682, a Saturday.
NV relates that Donati had had an attack of apoplexy on 28 December. The emperor's musician Clementino [Hader] lacked permission to
sing in the theaters of Venice, it says, and was pleased with the generous gifts he had already received for singing privately for the duke of
Mantua and the prince of Brunswick.

88 4 Mantuan baron.

 Galvani (Zeatri, p. 110) reports a rumor that this production was followed by a revival of Circe (1679/3) but notes that such a production
was not confirmed by Ivanovich, who wrote the libretto for the original production.

 Groppo (MS, p. 101) says that the intermezzi presented with La bugia regnante were those of II trionfo di Venere.

*' Traklion, on the north coast of Crete, was a frequent flashpoint for Venetian battles in the Aegean.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 153

The mention of seven choruses and nine sets in the libretto seems more likely to have been carried over
from the Viennese production than actually accommodated at the small Teatro di Cannaregio.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani CR 3; Bonlini 195; Groppo 198; Alm 277

1682/5 Carlo, re d'Italia Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[CHARLES, KING OF ITALY]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1682-01-20
a Dedication to [the goddess] Fortune

In this largely fictional account, Carlo III [879-888] was called The Fat because of the four crowns
bestowed on him which he lacked the intelligence to manage. The work opened in a tomb, where Cyrene
was trying to bring to life a cadaver through magic incantations. The cast featured twelve singers, eleven
Roman gods, the cadaver, and thirteen groups of mimes. In the final scene of the work, the four alchemical
elements  Earth, Air, Fire, and Water  were depicted.

@ Carlo opened on 20 (I-MOas A) or 21 (NV) January 1682, with the princes of Brunswick and Mirandola,
and Lubomirski in attendance (I-Rvat A). The performance was generally applauded (I-Rvat NV).
Domenico Cecchi (Il Cortona) sang in the title role with Francesco de Castris (Rodaspe). Other
members of the cast were the same as for Flavio Cuniberto, with the addition of Anna Maria Manarini
(Cirene) and two unnamed singers.

A Arias in I-Tn (seconda), Vqs
Listed as Galvani SGG 8; Bonlini 198; Groppo 201; Alm 280, 281

1682/6 Lisimaco riamato da Alessandro Music by Giovanni Legrenzi
[LYSIMACHOS REUNITED WITH ALEXANDER]
A dramma per musica Text by Giacomo Sinibaldi, rev. Aurelio Aureli
MM Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a scherzo sul ponte...invece di ballo SORTING DATE: 1682-01-23~
e Dedicated to Giovanni Battista Mora, N.V.*

OR The story was concerned with the legendary efforts of Alexander the Great [336-323 BC] to conquer
Macedonia. Lysimachos, who would succeed Alexander, was to rule for almost a half century [323-281
BC]. The libretto for this production was dedicated on 23 January 1682. This was one of the few works

 Cannaregio continued to produce comedies, and a modest budget for opera productions can be assumed.
% As king of Italy, of Ravenna, and of Benevento, as well as emperor.

* This depiction may have been an effort to play to Lubomirski's cultural traditions. Krakow, his native city, was noted for its alchemists.
The prince's siblings remained an intermittent presence in Venetian theaters for many years to come. In 1700 one of his brothers was staying
in the home of Pietro Dolfin at San Cassiano (I-Vas, RC, Busta 592, letter from Lodovico Fr. Cremona of 18 gennaro 1699 [M.V.] ).

 Cf. Caffi, Appunti, ff. 5Of.
 Giovanni Rossi possessed a copy of the score (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

 The battle between the Macedonians and Persians seems here to have been modeled on the Venetian guerra de' pugni, in which teams from
opposite ends of the city, the Nicolotti (from the western part) and the Castellani (from the eastern), fought for control of a bridge (usually
that over the neutral Rio San Barnaba) in a mock battle often staged at the behest of a notable visitor.

 On 14 April 1682 Mora was stripped of his title and property by the Council of Ten and sent into exile for the rest of his life. He was also
fined 2,000 internal and 4,000 external ducats (I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Avvisi, N. 46, entry of 25 April [16]82).

 The present text had been set in the preceding year for performance at the court of the exiled queen Christina of Sweden in Rome. For another
account of the story, see Ivanovich's (1673/2).

154

fi

 1682a
 1682b
 1682c

1682/7

mM

zy
ROO med

1682/8

rT

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

given at San Salvatore for which the cast is identified. Giuseppe Calvi sang in the title role, with G.
B. Moratelli (Alessandro), Giuseppe Tolomei (Cleonte), Ottavio Rochetti (Demetrio), Margarita Salicola
(Filea), Gio. Battista Sensi (Calistene), Rosanna Tarquini (A/cimena), Angela Salicola (Eurillo), and
don Sebastiano Orsei (Corebo). Sinibaldi's text was also set by Alessandro Scarlatti for performance
in Naples in 1683.

Arias in I-MOe, Tn (seconda), Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSal 35; Bonlini 196; Groppo 199; Alm 278

Gli amori fatali. Cf. Suppl. 5c.
Untitled trattenimento. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Il Girello. Cf. Suppl. 5c.October 16, 2006

Temistocle in bando Music by Antonio Giannettini
[THEMISTOCLES BANISHED]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1682-12-04

Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua!

Themistocles, an Athenian general of the fifth century BC, disguised himself as Emirenus of Egypt
before engaging Xerxes of Persia in a battle which resulted in his seeking asylum in Persia. The work
opened at the Hellespont. Temistocle was first performed on 4 December 1682 (M). The title-page of
the libretto is dated 1683. The libretto praised Giannettini's many arias enlivened by his singular virtue,
though in its continuation after Christmas Temistocle found little favor. Its run continued, however,
until 22 January 1683 (M). It appears that the singer Vittoria Tomi was promised 120 doppie to appear
at San Cassiano in 1682[-83]. As of 10 July 1684 she had still not been paid for her participation.'*!
The text was adapted by Giovanni Bononcini for the Teatro Capranica, Rome, in 1698. The later work
was widely circulated.

Arias in I-Vqs

Listed as Galvani SCas 24; Bonlini 201; Groppo 204; Alm 284, 285, 286

Ottone il Grande Music attributed to Paolo Biego'
[OTTO THE GREAT]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani'
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli and a battle SORTING DATE: 1682-12-15

Dedicated to Girolamo Venier, N.V.'
Otto the Great (936-973) led the Saxon colonization of the Baltic and Bohemia and in 962 was crowned
{Holy Roman] Emperor of the German Nation. His idea that earthly power should be ratified by

' Here the dedication to the duke may have been significant, for Morselli was to become the official court poet of Mantua.

'! 1-Vas, Censori, Scritture in Causa, Busta 17, entry by date (my thanks to Micky White for calling my attention to this).

' Biego was an organist at the church of SS. Giovanni e Paolo.

9 Silvani's first libretto was offered under the anagram Valsini. The librettist (c. 1660-c. 1728) was a Venetian abbot who became embroiled
ina political debate that attracted the interest of authorities (I-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1577, reports of Stefano Cristiani dated
21 Maggio and 30 Agosto 1683).

' Son of the procurator Nicold, Girolamo Venier had been named ambassador to France on 5 May 1682. In later years he served as one of
the three Riformatori dello Studio di Padova.

1682/9

im

1682/10

im

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 155

religious authority was novel. In this account Berengar, the king of Italy, wanted to see his son marry
Adelaide, the widow of Lothar, but his plans were foiled by Otto, who claimed Adelaide for himself.

The opening performance, though announced for 13 December 1682, was later reported to have occurred
on the 15th (M). The dedication had been signed on the Sth; the title-page of the libretto was dated 1683.

When the theaters opened after Christmas, Ottone had a poor reception. In consequence an unidentified
celebrity singer (personaggio) was added to the cast after the start of January.' The story was more

fortunate: it was recast by Antonio Salvi (cf. 1729/3, 1739/6) and Salvi's text was refashioned by Giacomo
Rossi (1722) for Handel's Lotario (HWV 26; London, 1729).

Arias in I-Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSGP 70; Bonlini 200; Groppo 203; Alm 283

Appio Claudio* Music attributed to Giovanni Marco Martini!
[ApPIus CLAUDIUS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1682-12-15

Dedicated to Michel Amelot, Marquis of Gournay'

The popular consul Appius Claudius was one of the Roman decemvirate elected to draw up a code of
laws in the early years of the Roman Republic. In this tale from Livy, the ruler's lascivious interest
in Virginia led her father to kill him. Appio Claudio was first performed on 15 December 1682 (M),
when it was well received. The title-page of the libretto is dated 1683.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SAng 12; Bonlini 204; Groppo 207; Alm 290

I due Cesari' Music by Giovanni Legrenzi
[THE Two CAESARS]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Advent (Novena)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1682-12-19

Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua

Bassianus Caracalla and Geta, the sons of the Roman Emperor Septimius Severus (193-211), shared
power for several years. This script concentrated on Bassianus's usurpation of the throne and violation
of the English princess Leucippe.' The opening of J due Cesari was announced for 20 December
1682. It was reported to have opened on the 19th (M), when it was found to be absolutely marvelous."
The title-page of the libretto was dated 1683. J due Cesari was revived in Milan in January 1688.'

'5 The Grimani had taken a risk in turning to novices for both the text and the music. The disfavor encountered here never seems to have hampered
Silvani. Biego's few later works also fared better.

'6 & Venetian.

7 Amelot had made his public entry as ambassador from the court of Louis XIV to Venice on 22 September 1682 (M). He remained in Venice
until c. 1692. His Histoire du gouvernment de Venise, a valuable portrait of Venetian government in his time, was banned in Italy and caused
Amelot to be sent to the Bastille, but it was reprinted in Amsterdam in 1695.

' The name originally belonged not to an English princess but to one of the Mineides.

' Literally benissimo a meraviglia. Vitali (Un cantante, p. 592) reports the citation of an opening at San Salvatore on 26 December in
the Bentivoglio archives and also mentions Giuseppe Maria Segni (Finalino) as a member of the cast.

" See Magaudda and Costantino, Un periodico, p. 116.

156 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

 The performance was said to be replete with beautiful voices, and the decorations were des plus
pompeuses et des mieux entendues of the season's offerings.''' Among the singers were Clemente
Hader (Clementino) and Gio. Battista Muzzi (Speroni or Speroncino)!"? (M) as Bassianus and
Geta, with Francesco de Castris (Fabio) and Rosanna Tarquini (Leucippe).'"? In the opening scene a
cantatrice and a pair of instrumentalists accompanied Geta on the royal bucintoro as it sailed on the
Tiber.'* A beautiful serenata was presented before the palace of the princess. Legrenzi was praised
in the libretto for having surpassed the limits of every belief in this year, so much so that the audience
would hear the swans of our time. For his part, the composer said in a letter of the 23rd that the work
played to full houses in its first three performances and that the performers were not only appreciated
but also admired.'

 The work itself was criticized for improprieties and for its length (which is not considered pleasant
here). The first fault was considered incorrigible but efforts were made to remedy the second. The
production was temporarily suspended so that three singers  [Gio. Battista] Muzzi (Speroni),
[Clemente] Hader, and Ferdinando [Chiaravalle?]  could rest their voices for the Christmas Eve service
at San Marco. To perform at it was regarded as a much coveted honor among the virtuosi who sing
in the theaters here.""

fi Arias in B-Be; I-Vqs
Listed as Galvani SSal 36; Bonlini 202; Groppo 205; Alm 287

1683/1 Il re infante Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[THE INFANTILE KING]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli and a battle' SORTING DATE: 1683-01-10
& Dedicated to Maximilian II Emanuel, Duke of Bavaria!!
 During the troubled rule of the emperor Tiberius [700-704], Flavius Liutbert [700-702] inherited the

throne of Italy as a child. His reign was manipulated by his tutor. The interests of France, Greece, and
Britain were represented here by other characters whom the librettist collectively described as those
both historical and added to history." Allegorical roles for Venus and the Roman spirit were added
in the revised version. JI re infante had its premiere on 10 January 1683 (M). The opening, originally
planned to occur immediately after Christmas, was delayed on account of the death, shortly before 19
December, of the countess [Ginevra] Manin, the wife of Gio. Carlo Grimani, a co-owner of the theater.'

'" Le Mercure galant, Fevrier 1683; quoted in Pallade veneta, p. 350.

"? Legrenzi referred to an effort to recruit Speroncino in a letter to Ippolito Bentivoglio of 7 March 1682 (Vitali, Un cantante, pp. 600-1).
A number of items reported by A. Morelli (pp. 73-78) seem also to suggest that the composer was directly involved in negotiations for the
participation of these singers.

3 The remaining singers were Anna Maria Manarini, Ferdinando Chiaravalle, Francesco de Castris, Bortolo Donadelli, and Nicola Pasini.

"4 A culturally mixed metaphor, since the bucintoro was the golden vessel in which the doge sailed into the Adriatic on the feast of Ascension
and other state occasions, while the Tiber flowed through Rome.

"'S Morelli, Legrenzi, pp. 77f. On the service at San Marco, see Ch. 5.3.
"6 A. Morelli, Legrenzi, pp. 77f.
" Cited in the second version of the libretto (e.g., US-LAu).

"8 Maximilian IT Emanuel (1662-1726) was the elector of Bavaria from 1679 until his death. He sided with the Austrians against the Turks
(1683) and with the Grand Alliance against Louis XIV (1689-97).

"9 The lengthy dedication of the libretto drew parallels between the dedicatee and Rodewald [actually Ansprando], duke of Asti, the tutor
of Flavaes Liutbert. It pays homage to the Bears of Germany [various dukes and princes], the Lions of Africa [various rulers], the Sun
of France [Louis XIV], and a king who is a pupil of the great crowned Eagle [the Emperor Leopold I].

 It appears that the Contessa died on a trip to Florence with her husband. The purpose of the trip, early in December, was to seek the intervention
of the Grand Duke in securing the services of Vincentino, then said to be the leading singer of that court. Grimani wished to offer a stipend

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 157

Owe The production was praised for its spectacular scenery and for the singing of Gio. Francesco Grossi
(Siface),'?! Vicenzino,' [Francesco] Ballarini (Rodoaldo),' and Margarita Salicola (Sestilia)
(M). Other singers were Carl'Antonio Rata (Flavio), Antonia Marzari (Anna), Antonio Fontana
(Formenti; Ariberto), Clarice Gigli (Doricle), Giovanni Buzzoleni (Enrico), Tomaso Boni (Gildo),
and Pietro Paolo Scandalibeni (Recimero, Aristene, and Ettore).'** The opening scene depicted a school
of various sciences outside Rome. Students were studying alchemy, military arts, astrology, magic,
philosophy, geography, and other sciences. // Re enjoyed such unprecedented success that the theater,
instead of staging a second opera, added some new canzonettes to it in early February. As the opera
was constituted on 20 February, the most notable scenes were those involving a host of 50 persons carried
ona platform by four elephants and a heavenly court suspended in the air from a machine (M). A trumpet
was used for the battle scene. On 30 January it was noted that the theater had greater attendance than
ever, despite the payment of 4 lire per person.

fi Arias in B-Be; I-Vqs; Le Mercure galant (Avril 1683)'?
Listed as Galvani SGG 9; Bonlini 203; Groppo 206; Alm 288, 289

1683/2 Cidippe Music by Antonio Draghi
[CyDIPPE]
A dramma per musica Text by Nicold Minato'
im Performed at the Teatro di Cannaregio SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With two intermedi' SORTING DATE: 1683-01-22
& Without dedication
Oo In this revival of the work first given in Vienna (18 December 1671), the commoner Acontius, unable

to wed the noblewoman Cydippe, hid a love-letter in an apple which he threw at the feet of the princess
as she worshiped a statue of Diana.'* The work had roles for a mute sculptor and the Greek god Echo.'
Cidippe was first performed in Venice shortly before 23 January 1683 (M). As given in Vienna, Cidippe
included contributions by the emperor Leopold I.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani CR 5; Bonlini 211; Groppo 214; Alm 298

of 600 doppie and to make the unusual provision that Vincentino (Vincenzino) could sing just three nights a week, on account of his weak
constitution. It later becomes obvious that he succeeded in this endeavor. See I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Avwvisi, N. 46, entries of 4 Xbre [Dicembre]
1682 and 6 Febraro 1683. On the latter date, Grimani's pending marriage to a dama genovese with a dowry of 100,000 ducats was announced.
However, his actual third wife proved to be a Venetian, Marieta Foscarini, whom he married in 1684 (Saunders, Repertoire, p. 3).

'2! Grossi, who sang in the role of Ergisto. The main citation is from Le Mercure galant, Fevrier 1683, which is extensively quoted in Pallade
veneta, pp. 347-50. Saunders (Repertoire, p. 451) notes that the Mercure errs in some of the biographical information it gives on singers.

"2 Probably Vincenzo Olivicciani (1646-1726). Kirkendale (Florence), p. 410, notes that this soprano had left the employ of the emperor in
1676 to return to Florence because of ill health. Although a cleric at the time of his death, Vicenzino was a celebrated opera singer; he returned
to Vienna in 1700 and retired there in 1711.

"3 Antonio Ballarini (whose relationship, if any, to Francesco is not known) had dealings with the Mantuan court (see I-MAas, AG, Carteggio
da Venezia, Busta 1577, letter of 16 Xbre [Dicembre] 1684).

'4 Olivicciani's name does not appear in the cast list provided by Caffi, Appunti, f. 51v. If Grimani's plan was followed, Antonio Fontana
would have taken Vincenzino's place in alternating performances.

'5 Giovanni Rossi possessed a copy of the score (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

"6 In the Venetian libretto, the text is said to be by a noted poet who enjoyed universal applause.
"7 One introducing and one replacing a ballo.

"8 The story is related in Ovid's Herodes.

'? The story was an improvisation on names from antiquity. Cydippe was, according to Herodotus, the wife of the tyrant Anaxilaus, who fought
against the Greeks in Sicily.

158 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1683/3 Marzio Coriolano Music by Giacomo Antonio Perti'
[MARTIUS CORIOLANUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
M1 Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1683-01-23
 Dedicated to Gasparo de Hard, Marquis of Carpio"!

The Roman general Martius Coriolanus, once a hero, became an enemy of the state because of his cruelty.

This drama emphasized amorous realignments instead. Marzio Coriolano was first performed on 23

January 1683 (M); the run ended on 11] February.'* The libretto had been dedicated on 20 January 1683.
A No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SSGP 71; Bonlini 206; Groppo 209; Alm 292

1683/4 L'innocenza risorta, ovvero Ezio Music attributed to Pietr' Andrea Ziani
[INNOCENCE REGAINED OR AETIUS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli
im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1683-02-06
& Dedicated to Alessandro Farnese, Prince of Parma'

In Roman history the captain Aetius/Ezio, who conquered Attila in France, was as emperor to be wrongly
accused of treachery against Valentinian [III]. After Valentinian's murder [454 AD], Maximus seized
control and married Valentinian's widow, Eudoxa/Eudossa.

CO L'innocenza opened during the week following 30 January 1683 (M), probably on 6 February, which
was the first day of Carnival. Le Mercure galant commented only on its scenery.'TM Its reception was
more enthusiastic than had been that of San Cassiano's previous offering, Temistocle (1682/7). One
of the singers had been brought by the dedicatee from Brussels and installed in a palace near San Lorenzo
(I-Rvat A). On 13 February the addition of the cantatrice from Reggio,'*> who was no less
accomplished in acting (fatezza) than virtuous in music, was noted (M). The work was produced in
Reggio Emilia (spring? 1683) under the title // talamo preservato della fedelta di Eudossa. Margarita
Salicola, who is likely to have been the cantatrice praised for her appearance in the Venetian production,
portrayed the widow. The cast also included Francesco Sarti Cottini (Valentiniano) and C. A. Riccardi
(Ezio).'* As retold in later works (e.g., 1698/4 and 1747/2) the story was based on different texts.

A Score in I-MOe"

Listed as Galvani SCas 25; Bonlini 207; Groppo 210; Alm 293

0 This work marked the Venetian debut of the Bolognese Perti (1661-1756), a counterpoint student of Franceschini, who was to enjoy considerable
respect on the Venetian stage over the coming years and to be a pillar of the Bolognese musical establishment for many decades.

5! The marquis was also the viceroy of Naples from 1683 to 1687.
'22 See the comment on Silla below.

'33 The prince (1635-89), who had been a cavalry captain in the mid-century war with Iraklion/Candia, was now an important supplier of troops
and monetary loans to the Venetian Republic (Hanlon, Twilight, p. 154). Although likened to Alexander the Great in the dedication, he had
been ailing for some time. After arriving in Venice during the week ending 19 February, he was carried about on a chair (I-Rvat, AS, NV,
N. 125, f. 174, entry of 13 Febraro 1683, and N. 46).

'4 Pallade veneta, p. 351.

'85 Identity undetermined.

'36 See Fabbri and Verti, Due secoli, p. 43.

'7 As Il talamo preservato dalla fedelta d'Eudossa. Facs. edn. (Venice, 1683) in IOB, 12.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 159

1683/5 Silla Music by Domenico Freschi
[SULLA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Andrea Rossini
Vd Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1683-02-06
& Dedicated to Giovanni Francesco Pisani, N.V.'*8
OOo Lucius Cornelius Sulla, a Roman military leader of the first century BC who was removed from command

in the conflict with Mithridates Eupator, incited a civil war in Rome. He was regarded by his opponents
as a dictator. Amorous involvements were emphasized in this account.'* Silla was first performed by
6 February 1683 (M). The libretto had been dedicated by the impresario Francesco Santurini on 4
February. Both Silla and Appio Claudio were received with beaucoup d'approbation.'* Both works
featured trumpet fanfares and the singing of Filanin, who in the arias with trumpet obbligato matched
his voice in an admirable manner."*! Silla, which was better received than Sant' Angelo's most recent
work, Appio Claudio (1682/9) (M), had a revival in Udine in 1699.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SAng 13; Bonlini 209; Groppo 212; Alm 296

1683/6 Il Giustino Music attributed to Giovanni Legrenzi
[JUSTIN]
A dramma per musica'* Text attributed to Nicold Beregan'
I Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a balloTM and a battaglia SORTING DATE: 1683-02-07
i) Dedicated to Alessandro Farnese, Prince of Parma!*

Born a peasant, the Byzantine Justin rose through military ranks to a position of power during the reign
of the emperor Anastasios [491-518 AD]. This work opened with the wedding of the elderly Anastasios
to Ariadne, the widow of the late emperor Xenon. Upon Anastasios's death, Justin was proclaimed
the new emperor by the army.' A clever statesman, he was able to reinvigorate the ties between the
Eastern and Western Empires. Justin and his nephew Justinian'' were accused of killing the popular
Gothic consul Vitalian, whose ghost appeared in this work.

 1 Giustino was first performed on 7 February 1683 (M). Its production continued until Shrove Tuesday.

O The Florentine resident, Matteo de Teglia, found the work to be majestic (maestoso) in its use of
machines and observed that the musicians were exquisite.!** Among its other notable features were

'88 Pisani had become a procurator in July 1682.

' The librettist complained in a note to readers of the need to reduce the plot, cut verses from arias, and eliminate scene changes.
' Le Mercure galant, Fevrier 1683, quoted in Pallade veneta, p. 351.

'' Probably a corruption of Finalin, i.e., Giuseppe Maria Segni da Finale.

' Described as a melodramma in the libretto.

8 This was Beregan's last libretto for the Venetian stage. It appeared after a long hiatus. Secret agents' reports in -MAas indicate that the
dramatist was also well known in the gambling houses of his native city.

's The first ballo was a social dance for cavalieri e dame. At its conclusion there was a gran sinfonia as the dancers dismounted from the
machine on which they had been performing.

'S He is likened in the dedication of the libretto to Alexander the Great.
6 Justin had been the subject of a tragedy by Ortensio Scamacca in the 1630s (cf. Riccoboni, Histoire, p. 105).
7 Justinian succeeded his uncle, serving from 527 to 565.

'481_Fas as quoted in Bossard, Viaggi, pp. 496f. The agent's letter of 13 febbraio 1683 says the work opened yesterday, i.e. on 12 February.

160

1683/7

im

1683/8

rT

&

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

acarriage drawn by two live horses, a giant of impressive appearance (vaghissima vista), and superb
machines. A second bass role was added during the week ending on the 13th. In the next week, scenes
in which monsters were slain and cherubs made to fly merited comment (M). The Mercure (Mars 1683)
described both land and sea battles, the impression made by the giant, and an elephant carrying twenty
people.' Owing to its unanticipated popularity, it was necessary, according to the Mercure, for those
desiring the open seating of the parterre to secure scagni two days in advance.

11 Giustino had eleven later productions in various locales, causing it to become Legrenzi's best known
opera.'*' Alessandro Scarlatti added new musical numbers for a Neapolitan performance of 1684. The
text was later used with music by Domenico Scarlatti, Albinoni, and Vivaldi for performances in Naples
(1703), Bologna (1711), and Rome (1724) respectively. Handel's work of the same name (HWV 37;
London, 1737) was based on Pariati's adaptation (1724) of Beregan's text.'?

Scores in I-Nc, Reas, Vnm;' arias in I-Nc, Rvat, RVo, Vqs

Listed as Galvani SSal 37; Bonlini 208; Groppo 211; Alm 294, 295

L'Orontea Music attributed to Antonio Cesti
[ORONTEA]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giacinto Andrea Cicognini
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1683-02-17

Dedicated to Cesare Ignazio d'Este, Prince of Modena'

This revival of the work, previously given in 1649, 1656, and 1666 (1666/2),'* was in rehearsal by
the 13th, two days after the close of Marzio (1683/3). It was first performed c. 17 February 1683 (M),
which was also the date of dedication of its libretto. It was said to be the third opera. That this was
a revival was a cause for apology (M), but it was said in its defense that the work had enough of the
ridiculous and the merit of coming from the accredited pen of Cesti to warrant a good reception.
Score (1656): GB-CMc; I-PAc, Rsc, Rvat!*

Listed as Galvani SSGP 72; Bonlini 210; Groppo 213; Alm 297

La Virti sublimata dal Grande Music attributed to Marc' Antonio Ziani

overo Il Macedone continente
[VIRTUE SUBLIMATED BY THE GREAT MAN, OR THE CONTINENT MACEDONIAN]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Aurelio Aureli
Performed at the Teatro di Cannaregio SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo and a battaglia SORTING DATE: 1683-02-15~
Without dedicatee

' Possibly in the battaglia, in which Vitaliano was thrown from his carriage and taken prisoner by Giustino.

'S The giant was probably Atlantis, who carried the world on his back in Act One. The live horses and the elephant were seen in Act Three.

S| Beregan also used paraphrases of the text in a serenata, La fedelta consolata dalla speranza (1686; cf. ultra).

152

Further on the travels of Giustino, see Bossard, I viaggi, and the works cited therein.

83 Elements of all three sources are represented in the performing edition published by Luigi Bettarini (Milan, 1980).

'S The prince (1653-1715), who was the marquis of Montecchio and the general of the cavalry of the Venetian Republic, was to make a public
entry in Venice on 6 April 1683 (see I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 46, entry of X Aprile 1683). Modena was an important supporter of the
papal initiative to form a Holy League against the Turks.

85 The 1649 version was given in a private house on the Calle de' Proverbi which later became known as the Teatro de' SS. Apostoli. The
work was also staged in Innsbruck in 1656. It was performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo as 1666/2.

'86 Ed. William Holmes, Wellesley edn., xi, 1973.

A

 1683a
1683/9

i

O@OR

1683/10

i

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 161

In this revival of Alessandro Magno in Sidone (1679/1), the roles and the incidental items were all
preserved, even though to fit in the more limited space of the Cannaregio theater the action would have
required significant adaptation. Some activity in the teatrini was reported on 1 March, the day before
Shrove Tuesday (M), but a production would have to have started sooner to justify the effort. This was
the last work to be given at the Teatro di Cannaregio until 1699.

No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani CR 4; Bonlini 205; Groppo 208; Alm 291

Ermione riaquistata. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

*
Falaride, tiranno di Agrigento Music by Giovanni Battista Bassani!*
[PHALARIS, THE TYRANT OF AGRIGENTO]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1683-11-29

Dedicated to Alessandro Contarini, N.V.'*

The argonaut Phalaris, who ruled Sicily for sixteen years [sixth century BC] was noted for his brutality.
In this plot it was matched by his sexual prowess. His ministers (among them the Moorish eunuch
Lenos/Leno) were called upon to execute his malevolent wishes. In the opening scene a female singer
exhorted Phalaris to enjoy himself. The closing scene took place in the harem (serraglio) to which his
concubines were confined.'

Falaride was first performed on 29 November 1683 (I-MOas A) with satisfaction (M). The title-page
is dated 1684. According to Antonio Predieri, the apparent impresario for this production, the dress
rehearsal (prova generale) on the 23rd caused great envy, as a consequence of which the text was held
to be too lascivious. A few words were then changed as a token gesture to the censors.' On December
4th Predieri reported that the work had been considered good enough (assai bene) at its opening,
while on the 12th he admitted that everyone spoke ill of it. However, he said that this did not hurt
attendance. On the 18th he reported that the newly opened Licinio (1683/11) was more lascivious than
Falaride. He expressed resentment towards San Giovanni Grisostomo (the large fish that eats the small
one).'! He also reported that La Romanina,' a member of his cast, was ill.

No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SAng 14; Bonlini 213; Groppo 216; Alm 300, 301

L'anarchia dell'imperio Music attributed to Giovanni Legrenzi
[THE RULER'S ANARCHY]

A dramma per musica Text by Tomaso Stanzani
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1683-12-04

'S7 In the libretto Bassani was described as the maestro of the Accademia della Morte in Ferrara. Predieri's letter, cited below, suggests his
own involvement in the music.

'8 Contarini was a procurator of San Marco.

' The text is full of sexual inuendos. Among them Leno, said here to be a Moorish eunuch, is also the Latin word for pimp.

6 1-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1578, letter of 27 Novembre 1683: L' opera nostra, per la prova generale seguita martedi prossimo
passato con applauso universale, ha causato nelli emoli una si grand' invidia, e timore che hanno voluto si ponga sotto |' occhio de recisori,
che per reputatione hanno modrato poche parole....

'! Op. cit., entries by date.

 A nickname for several singers. Barbara Riccioni, whose roles before 1683 are identified, was later called La Romanina.

162 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

ey Dedicated to Carlo Contarini, N.V.'
In this medieval tale, the emperor Ludwig/Lodovico I [816-840, with interruptions] was deceived by
his rebellious sons but earned the sobriquet the Pious. He passed the title of king of Italy to his son
Lothar [820], who repeatedly attempted to impose himself as emperor.

 L'anarchia opened on 4 December 1683,' which was also the date of dedication of its original libretto.'
Legrenzi's correspondence of the preceding spring indicates that the availability of the singers Giuseppe
Maria Donati, Cecchino [Francesco de Castris], Vicenzino [Vincenzo Olivicciani], and [Giuseppe]
Venturino was been explored. [Giovanni] Buzzoleni had expressed an interest in being relieved of future
duties in Venice. Melani's help had been requested in locating a particular (unnamed) virtuosa.'*

Oo The premiere was given over the objection of the performers, who considered the work to be under-
rehearsed (M). Although it was received initially with universal satisfaction, attendance rapidly
declined. It must be on this account that the libretto was revised.'' By the 17th the audience had dwindled
to about 40 persons per performance. This was said to be because, although the music and singers were
most celebrated, the subject was a joke. Despite these shortcomings, L anarchia dellimperio was
given almost every night during the later part of Carnival in 1688 in Milan.'

i Arias in GB-LbI; I-MOe, Vqs'
Listed as Galvani SSal 38; Bonlini 212; Groppo 215; Alm 299

1683/11 Licinio imperatore Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[Licinitus EMPEROR]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Advent (Novena)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1683-12-17
a Dedicated to Gasparo Altieri, Prince of Oriolo'

Licinius and Constantine ruled the Roman Empire jointly [313-24]. After Licinius was defeated, the
capital of the (Eastern) Empire was renamed Constantinople. This account emphasized Licinius's cruelty,
dishonesty, libidinousness, sensuality, cupidity, and ignorance. Rome's /efterati organized a moral
education for him, enabling the librettist to proclaim the work's exaltation of virtue.

@ Licinio imperatore opened on 17 December 1683.'7' The title-page was dated 1684. Gio. Antonio Anerio
wrote on the 17th that the new work was truly beautiful for [its] singers, [its] scenery, and other
inventions fit for a grand prince.' On 18 December it was said to be well received as much for its
scenery as for its voices, not to mention two camels left by the Turkish army near Vienna (M). Antonio

8 The son of the late procurator Andrea Contarini.

4 |_MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1577, letter from Antonio Predieri dated 4 Xbre [Dicembre] 1683.
'65 E.g., US-LAu 299 and I-Vcg 59.A.91/8.

6 See A. Morelli, Legrenzi, pp. 79f.

87 Second version: e.g., US-Wlc, dedicated on 1 January 1684.

8 See Magaudda and Costantini, Un periodico, p. 116.

6 There is no trace of the gilt-edged copies of this work that Predieri said he was sending with a setting of Falaride (the work at Sant' Angiolo)
to the duke of Mantua on 12 Xbre [Dicembre] 1683 (his letter is in I-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1577). On existing sources,
see Reinmar Emans, Die einstimmigen Kantaten, Canzonetten, and Serenaden Giovanni Legrenzis, Diss., University of Bonn, 1984.

' The Roman Altieri, an honorary member of the Venetian nobility, maintained a court in his palace in Cannaregio.

'! |.MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1578, report of Antonio Predieri (made on the 18th), f. lv. The date is confirmed in I-Rvat, AS,
NV, N. 125, f. 1204v.

'? |_MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1578, letter of 17 Decembre 1683. The following singers can be identified: Domenico Cecchi
(Licinio), Francesco de Castris (Giunio), Giuseppe Canavese (Quintilio), Margarita Salicola (Eusonia), Francesco Ballarini (Sabino), Clarice
Gigli (Gitilde), Tomaso Bovi (Breno), and Antonio Fontana (Formenti; Spartaco). Those who took the roles of Leonio and Amasio cannot
be identified. See Caffi, Appunti, and Saunders, Repertoire, p. 451.

1683/12

M

O

1684/1

V1

OORS

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 163

Predieri considered it more lascivious than the concurrent production of Falaride (1683/9). He maintained
that works given at San Giovanni Grisostomo were less rigorously scrutinized than those at Sant' Angelo
(see 1683/9). He nevertheless sent a copy of the work to Mantua.'?

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SGG 10; Bonlini 214; Groppo 217; Alm 302

Traiano' Music attributed to Giuseppe Felice Tosi!
[TRAJAN]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1683-12-26

Dedicated to Stefano Capello, N.V.

Trajan served as emperor of Rome from 98 to 117. He earlier held commands in various parts of Europe
and Asia. The work opened with an earthquake, which took place while Trajan slept. When 7raiano
was first performed, on c. 26 December 1683, it was received with satisfaction (M).'%

No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani GP 73; Bonlini 215; Groppo 218; Alm 303

L'incoronazione di Dario
[THE CORONATION OF DARIUS]

Music attributed to Domenico Freschi

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1684-01-04~

Dedicated to Lucio della Torre [Torriano], Count of Valsassina!

The death of King Cyrus of Persia left as contenders for the throne Darius, who claimed noble birth;
Orontes, who had a popular following; and Hargapos/Argapo, who enjoyed the support of the army.
Overcoming various plots and deceptions, Darius prevailed and won the hand of Stateira, the daughter
of Cyrus. Darius's coronation [522 BC] coincided with the beginning of Persia's great war with Greece.

This work was first performed on c. 4 January 1684 (M). The duke of Mantua gave permission on c.
18 December 1683 for a young trumpeter (putello trombetta) to go to Venice to perform in the second
work at Sant' Angelo. Once there, he was accepted into the service of the Malipiero family with many
obligations and was praised for his virtue. The singer nicknamed La Romanina remained ill, and
Predieri feared for her health.'' L incoronazione was to be revived at Sant' Angelo as Dario (1685/2).
Perti set the text for Bologna (1686) and Aldrovandini for Naples (1705). A revised version of the text
was reset in 1717 by Vivaldi (1707/3; RV 719) for Sant' Angelo.

Score in I-Vnm
Listed as Galvani SAng 15; Bonlini 217; Groppo 220; Alm 305

'3 |.MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1578, letter of 18 Xbre [Dicembre] 1683.

' This was the first of several works set during the 1680s by the Bolognese Tosi for performance in Venice.

"5 Its designation in the libretto as a quarta opera must refer to its position within the collective calendar of all of Venice's theaters.

"76 An imperial count.

'7 1-MAas, AG, loc. cit., letters of Antonio Predieri dated 18 Xbre [Dicembre] 1683 and primo gennaro 1684. The trumpeter, who was to
be paid 30 ducats for his appearance plus expenses, seems to have been in the care of the violinist Giuseppe Brusaschi.

164

1684/2

ORO

1684/3

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Ricimero, re de' vandali Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[RICIMER, KING OF THE VANDALS]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1684-01-22~

Dedicated to Moritz Wilhelm, Duke of Saxony-Zeitz'

As the Roman Empire fell, the Vandals sacked much of Europe. Ricimer, a Roman general of Swebe
descent,' was raised to the rank of patrician in recognition of his successful defeat of the Vandals in
458. At the start of the reign of Libius Severus [461], Ricimer fell in love with the daughter of Valerian
III [425-455 AD]. Power eventually went to his head, and in 465 he murdered Libius. Ricimero is one
ofa series of works attempting to mine the history of the declining Roman empire for the purpose of
highlighting the contributions of German leaders to Italian survival. Among them, this was the first
work dedicated to a German. The parallel was prominent in the mind of librettists as the Holy League
crafted its strategy against the Turks.

During the autumn of 1683 a lot of publicity about the upcoming opera season was circulated. Many
singers were coming from Germany and, it was hinted, this would raise the quality of performance
significantly. As they began to arrive, it was also noted that the costs to the theaters would be greater
than in the past. The duke of Saxony arrived in Venice on 8 January 1684.'* An opening around the
middle of the month would have been likely but for the fact that the doge died on the 15th. The ducal
succession eclipsed carnival entertainments and the publicity that would normally have attended the
opening of a work by Pallavicino, who was the duke's Kapellmeister. The cast included two of the
duke's favorite singers  Margarita Salicola and Domenico Cecchi (Il Cortona), but the singer in
the title role has not been identified.'*!

No musical sources known'?
Listed as Galvani SGG 11; Bonlini 218; Groppo 221; Alm 306

Publio Elio Pertinace Music by Giovanni Legrenzi
[PUBLIUS HELVIUS PERTINAX]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro d' Averara'
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1684-01-22

Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua

By some interpretations, the demise of the Roman Empire began with the fall of Publius Helvius Pertinax.
He served briefly as emperor in 193 AD before being murdered by one of his Praetorian guards, who
then attempted to put the Empire up for sale. The focus here was on Publius's ascension by acclamation
after the murder of Lucius Commodus.

"8 Moritz Wilhelm served as a commander in the upcoming campaign against the Turks.

' The Swebes were a Germanic tribe of the early middle ages. The word was derived from the Middle High German verb to swim.

8 Other circumstances over the next two weeks may also have thwarted plans for this production. The weather was extremely bad. Hundreds
of people had succumbed to a fever. Only after the 29th, when the new doge, MarcAntonio Giustinian, was duly elected and inaugurated,
can there have been any significant activity in the theaters. The fact that this work's opening is not mentioned suggests that it was obscured
by these many other occurrences.

'! Other members of the cast corresponded to those in Licinio. See Caffi's notes (Joc. cit.) and in Saunders, Repertoire, p. 452.

' Griovanni Rossi possessed a copy of the score (see I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

8 From Bergamo.

Ow

A

 1684a
 1684b

1684/4

rd

O@

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 165

This production was to open on 22 January 1684 (M), when a good reception was anticipated. The
cast was well regarded.'** Celebrations of the election on the 25th of Marc' Antonio Giustinian as doge
are likely to have disrupted the production. The work may have been revived briefly in December 1684.'*
The San Marco cellist Carlo Fedeli (Saggion) filed a claim on 2 May 1684 for 100 ducats he was
still owed by the impresario Gasparo Torelli for the playing he had done for the rehearsals and
performances of two operas (this and 1683/10) during the preceding year at San Salvatore. The rate
of pay was high for an instrumentalist and suggests that Fedeli was the concertmaster at the theater.'**
Arias in GB-Lbl; I-MOe

Listed as Galvani SSal 39; Bonlini 216; Groppo 219; Alm 304

Untitled cantata for Ascension. Cf. Suppl. 7.

L'Erginda. Cf. 1680/8.

L'amante fortunato per forza Music by Giovanni Varischino
[THE LOVER WHO WAS NECESSARILY LUCKY]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro d'Averara
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1684-11-29

Dedicated to Giulia Rangoni, Marchioness Ariberti'

Eumenes, the king of Pergamum, allied himself in the second century BC with Rome in its battle against
the common enemy Antiochos. Pergamum reached its cultural peak under Eumenes' rule. While not
hiding his disgust with the text, d' Averara reminded his audience of Varischino's much appreciated
score for Odoacre [1680/1].

L'amante fortunato is reported to have opened on 29 November 1684 (I-MOas A, NV), even though
the dedication of surviving libretti is dated 1' ultimo [30] Novembre 1684. Suspended for the Novena
of Christmas, the production resumed after Christmas and continued into the new year (M). In a note
to the discreet reader, d' Averara said his work was based on a French drama but suffered from both
translation to the Italian and adaptation to a musical setting. He said that in such an adaptation the
musicians want to have more songs (canzoni) than words and that not only the quantity but also the
character of the personalities is prescribed. Therefore, he concluded, he had to alter the invention,
intrigues, and almost all the episodes.

No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SAng 16; Bonlini 219; Groppo 222; Alm 307

'* The singers included Gio. Battista Muzzi (Speroni; then in the employ of the Empress Eleonora), Francesco de Castris (Cecchino),
and various musicians from Mantua and Parma (Anna Maria Manarini, Rosanna Tarquini, Chiaretta Bianchetti, and Ferdinando Chiaravalle
from Mantua; Ascanio Belli, Carlo Andrea Clerici, and Pietro Cesti from Parma).

' It is otherwise difficult to make any sense of a report made to Prince Ferdinando de' Medici on 6 January 1685 by Alessandro Guasconi,
his agent in Venice, who said that Publio Elio Pertinace had already failed (e di la per terra) and Pallavicino's Massimo Puppieno [1685/1]
had just opened (Holmes, Operatic Commissions, p. 160).

'8 1-Vas, Censori, Busta 17, item of 2 Maggio 1684. Fedeli received 100 ducats per annum for serving as concertmaster for the orchestra at
San Marco, Theater orchestras were much smaller; the relatively high rate of pay (for an intrumentalist) may reflect a correspondingly large
number of occasions on which Fedeli's presence was required.

8' The marchioness was a prime mover in establishing Cremona's first theater, the Ariberti. Opened as a private theater in 1675, it offered
comedies and operas. The marchioness was herself the author of some theatrical texts.

166

1684/5

V1



1685/1

mM

&
OO #

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Ariberto e Flavio,

regi de' Longobardi' Music by Carlo Ambrogio Lonati'TM*
[ARIBERT AND FLAVIUS, RULERS OF THE LOMBARDS]
A dramma per musica Text by Rinaldo Cialli'
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1684-12-26

Dedicated to Arnold [Aernout] Druyvesteyn, Secretary of Haarlem'

In Lombard history of the early eighth century, Flavius Aribertus II (here called Ariberto) cut off the
ears of the wife and daughter and pulled out the eyes of the son of his enemy, Flavius Ausprandus (here
called Flavio). Later realizing that he owed his life to this enemy, Aribert restored these members
and the rule of Ausprandus.'!

Ariberto was first performed on 26 December 1684 (M), despite its autumn designation.' The libretto
had been dedicated on 9 December 1685. The title-page gives the year as M.DC.LXXXV at the top
and M.DCL.XXXIV as a printer's date at the bottom. Cialli said of Lonati, a noted violinist, that
with the bow ofa musical instrument he has excited the soul ofan entire world. The production elicited
universal satisfaction as much for the exquisite voices as for the composition and. ..perfect operations.
The elector of Saxony was so impressed with the singing of Domenico Cecchi (Il Cortona)' that
he took him into his service, granting him a title of honor and a huge stipend (I-MOas A).

Arias in I-MOe
Listed as Galvani SSal 40; Bonlini 220; Groppo 223; Alm 308

Massimo PuppienoTM Music by Carlo Pallavicino
[MAXIMUS PUPPIENUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1685-01-04~

Dedicated to the Empress Mother, Eleonora Gonzaga'TM

The Roman soldier Maximinus ascended briefly to the position of emperor [235 AD]. Vilified for his
brutality, he was removed in favor of Gordian, then consul in Africa. Gordian was killed within five
months, which paved the way for the ascent of Maximus Puppienus [236-238 AD]. The original work
included roles for Happiness and the Ghost of Gordian, while a revised version included allegorical
roles for Rome and Africa. Massimo Puppieno opened shortly before'** 6 January 1685 (M), probably
on the 4th (the theaters were closed on the Ist, 2nd, and 3rd), when it elicited universal satisfaction.

'8 Lonati was currently serving as a virtuoso to the duchess of Mantua.

' This was the first complete libretto by Cialli, a Venetian priest.

'% Described in the libretto as secretary, Druyvesteyn (1641-98) was subsequently Burgemeister (mayor) of Haarlem.

'! See also the account for I/ re infante (1683/1).

' NV sheds additional light on this work in noting in an entry dated 9 December (I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 127, f. 881v) that the Council of Ten
had thus far refused to grant a permit to open the work despite the forceful entreaties (vive istanze) of the principals. On the 16th it gave the
impression that the work must have opened before the theaters closed for the Novena. Yet the report of the 30th tends to converge with that
of (M) in suggesting that the work opened after Christmas. Any pre-Novena performances may have been officially considered rehearsals.

'3 The libretto identifies Gasparo Torelli as the scenery designer, Carlo Lodovico del Basso as the set-painter, Pietro de Zorzi as the engineer,
and Orazio Franchi as the costume designer.

'4 The empress (1630-86) was Mantuan by birth.

'85 Nello spirare [della settimanal, i.e., as the week was expiring.

1685/2

OR.

1685/3

1685/4

im

i)

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 167

The libretto was dedicated on 28 December 1684. The title-page is dated 1685. Scarlatti's setting of
the same text opened with universal applause in Naples on 26 December 1695.'

Scores in I-Nc, PES

Listed as Galvani SSGP 74; Bonlini 221; Groppo 224; Alm 309, 310

Dario Music by Domenico Freschi
[Darius]

A dramma per musica Text by Adriano Morselli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1685-01-07~

Dedicated to Tomaso Priuli

This modified version of L 'incoronazione di Dario (1684/1) seems likely, on the basis of circumstantial
evidence, to have opened early in January 1685.

Score in I-Vnm

Listed as Galvani Ang 17; Bonlini 223; Groppo 226; Alm 312

Rodoaldo, re d'Italia Music by Domenico Gabrielli!
[RODEWALD, KING OF ITALY]

A dramma per musica Text by Tomaso Stanzani
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1685-01-10

Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua

Rodewald, a mythical king of Italy, wished to marry his daughter to a potential successor. His choice,
an apparent peasant, surprised but suited Rodewald's subjects. This was the first fully staged opera
to be given at the newly restored Teatro Zane since 1677; puppet operas had been given between
1680 and 1682 (see Suppl. Sc). The libretto was dedicated on 10 January 1685. The production was
in progress by the 13th but did not satisfy anyone (M).'*

Score in I-MOe

Listed as Galvani SMoi 24; Bonlini 222; Groppo 225; Alm 311

Penelope la casta Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[PENELOPE THE CHASTE]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a prologue SORTING DATE: 1685-01-28

Dedicated to Georg Ludwig (Prince) and Ernst August (Duke) of Brunswick'

'%6 Griffin Doc. 82, entry of 28 Decembre 1685. Scarlatti's setting, also given at Leghorn in 1697, was published in a moder edition by Colin
Slim (The Operas of Alessandro Scarlatti, vy; Cambridge and London, 1979).

87 Domenico Gabrielli, an enormously inventive composer (1651-90) from Bologna, was a cellist and a pupil of Franceschini.

'58 But see the note for Clearco in Negroponte (1685/9).

' Georg Ludwig (1660-1727) was the first-born son of Ernst August and eventual king (from 1714) of England. The Houses of Brunswick
and Hanover were supplying one-third of the troops used in the current Holy League campaign in Greece, which was designed to divert the
Turks from their assault on Hungary (Hanlon, Twilight, p. 164). The dukes of Saxony were officially received by the doge on 3 and 9 February
1684 [M.V.], the first date coincident with the opening of Carnival. Johann Georg III, the elector of Saxony (1680-91), spent all or most of
February in Venice. Fiirstenau (Geschichte der Musik, p. 277) dates the duke's visit from 15 January to 28 February. One report (M) indicates
that he was expected on the 29th but did not arrive until the 31st; avvisi place his arrival later (see 1685/5). One (I-MOas A) relates that he
arrived during the week ending 10 February and left on 10 March for Piazzola. He set off from there for Saxony within a few days.

168 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

In Greek mythology Penelope, the wife who waited twenty years for the return of her husband Ulysses,
was considered a paragon of virtue for resisting the marriage proposals of numerous suitors. In the style
of courtly opera, Penelope's personal virtues were here highlighted in such allegorical roles as those
of Merit, Constancy, Valor, Glory, and Truth. There were also roles for Doubt, Suspicion, Fame,
Necessity, Politics, Suspicion, Arrogance, Forgetfulness, Earth, War, Imagination, and other attributes.
There were three editions of the libretto.

XO) Penelope opened on 28 January 1685, when it was universally applauded."' A revival with the music
of Chelleri at Sant' Angelo (1716/9) was a pale reflection of the original work and not well received.
Giuseppe Canavese sang as Ulysses. The roles of Elvida and Ariene were taken by Antonia Marzari
and Clarice Gigli respectively. Other male singers were Antonio Fontana (Formenti; Osimante),
Venturin (Lutetio), Domenico Milchiori (Gismondo), and Tomaso Boni (Gildo).

 The performance of Margarita Salicola in the title role was still remembered thirty years later, partly
on account of the events which followed. The elector of Saxony was so captivated by her singing that
he forthwith took her into his service with a title of honor and a huge stipend. Her travel was staged
as a kidnapping because she anticipated disapproval. She left Venice clandestinely, via Murano (with
the help of the Venetian nobleman Giovanni Molin), by boat to Piazzola, where festivities on 11 March
celebrated her future position with a performance. From there she traveled by coach to Dresden in the
company of the Mantuan agent Carlo Maria Vialardi (I-MOas A).?

The elector also reassumed Pallavicino into his service. The composer, in turn, recruited the sopranos
Domenico Cecchi and Giuseppe Milanese for the Saxon court. Not content merely with musicians
to establish a beachhead of Venetian culture in their midst, the Saxons also offered enormous stipends
to some gondola-makers to go to Dresden to introduce the use of these boats, particularly in the summer
on the Elbe.

- Scarlatti's setting of the same text was given in Naples around 13 February 1696 and continued until
the 27th. Starring Giuseppe Canavese, it enjoyed praise which exceeded that of all the other theaters
of Italy.5 The performance given at the Casa Corsini in Florence on 22 November 1705 could have
involved Pallavicino's music; it featured Margarita Salicola in the title role. The music is usually credited
to Scarlatti. Meanwhile, Perti had also set the text in 1696 for performance in Rome. Chelleri reset the
text for Sant' Angelo in 1716, but the work had a catastrophic production. Nonetheless, the long shadow
cast by the text reached into the nineteenth century through the operas of such composers as Cimarosa
(Naples, 26 December 1794, with later performances extending to St. Petersburg, 1817).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SGG 12; Bonlini 224; Groppo 227; Alm 313

2 Groppo MS, p. 108. The figure of Penelope had been the subject ofan anonymous dramma per musica given in Mantua in 1674 in celebration
of the wedding of the Emperor Leopold to Claudia Felice (Besutti, Corte, p. 92).

20! 1-Rvat, AS, Fondo Avvisi, N. 48, entry of 3 Febraro 1685, f. lv. The same source indicates that Carnival did not officially open until the
3rd, i.e., the date of the entry. This was also the dedication date of an unidentified libretto cited in NGDMM/2 and GO. An apparently revised
version of the libretto (US-LAu 313) was dedicated on 14 March 1685. It may have been linked to the private performances given at Piazzola
after the season ended (Suppl. 5a), since the dedication date fell in Lent.

2 The abduction of Margarita Salicola is documented is scores of letters in -MAas, AG; in many news-sheets, and in I-Rvat, AS, Fondo
Avvisi, N. 48, entries of 10 and 17 Marzo 1685, et al. Salicola was a willing passenger, but her secretive departure shocked her family and
associates. She spoke in advance with her priest, to whom her father made desperate pleas for her return. Salicola's Mantuan escort, Count
Vialardi, did not return from Bavaria until 23 June. The duke of Saxony cancelled a trip to Genoa in order to proceed hastily to his own court,
where Salicola's salary was set at 150 ongari a year. Additional documentation was reported by Irene Alm at the meeting of the Society for
Seventeenth Century Music at Wellesley College (April 1998).

23 Giuseppe Canavese, who sang in the role of Ulysses. Cecchi did not sing in Penelope because he was engaged at San Salvatore (1684/6).
204 T-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 48, entries of 10 (f. lv) and 17 Marzo (f. 1r) 1685.
205 See Griffin Docs. 86, 90.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 169

1685/5 Teseo tra le rivali Music by Domenico Freschi
[THESEUS AMONG HIS RIVALS]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
im Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1685-02-04~
a Dedicated to Johann Georg III, Elector of Saxony

In Greek mythology, Phaedra/Fedra, the daughter of Minos, king of Crete, was given in marriage to
Theseus, who was already married to the Amazon queen Antiope.* Phaedra bore him two children.
Here four additional women were Phaedra's rivals for the love of Theseus. The work included a dance
for children in the temple of Minerva and other balli for pilgrims and for figures representing Phaedra.

 A revised version of the libretto was dedicated on 7 February 1685. The elector, expected on the 29th,
arrived on 31 January, and more Saxon royals arrived within the next few days (M). Aureli commented
in his note to readers on the fact that he was involved in two productions simultaneously. He noted
that he had accommodated this work to the needs of Sant' Angelo and called attention to the merits of
the scenery and the music of Freschi.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SAng 18; Bonlini 227; Groppo 230; Alm 316

1685/6 Tullo Ostilio Music attributed to Marc' Antonio Ziani
[TULLIUS HOSTILIUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Adriano Morselli?!
rr Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1685-02-10~
@ Dedicated to Count Stefan Adam"!
 While Tullius Hostilius, a legendary king of the Romans, was locked in battle with the Albans, his

daughter Marcia was abducted by Silvius and subsequently conceived Celius. Circumstantial evidence,
particularly from musical sources, points strongly to an opening shortly after 3 February 1685. Many
dignitaries were massing in Venice for military and political discussions. Duke Maximilian II Emanuel
of Bavaria was expected during the week following 3 February (M, Rvat A). The new French ambassador
arrived on the 8th (A). The Polish count could have traveled with the Saxon delegation (see 1685/5).
o- Tullo Ostilio was revived in Milan in February 1686. Under the title Alba soggiogata da' romani, it
was also performed in Reggio Emilia in the spring of 1686, with Francesco Ballarini (Zullo), Francesco
de Castris (Silvio), and Anna Orlandi (Martia).''* Giovanni Bononcini set a text revised by Stampiglia
for the Tordinona (Rome, 1694). Sometimes under the latter title, the work was also performed in Bologna

26 Another name of Hippolyta.

 Cf. 1685/4. The first version could have opened on 29 or 30 January, but since Lent did not begin until 7 March, it is more likely to have
opened somewhat later.

2 The other was Massimo Puppieno (1685/1). Aureli said that this situation arose because six theaters were open at the same time.

2 Venetian sources resolutely say Tullo but in many other accounts he is Tullio.

210 At this time Morselli and Ziani were both tied to the Mantuan court. The duke, Ferdinand Carlo, arrived on 23 February, when, owing to
the exceptionally long season, almost two weeks of Carnival still remained.

2! This Polish nobleman was captain of the Hussar regiment, probably in the company of the Polish prince Kinigsmark [= Kenigsmark]
who left Venice during the second week of March (I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 48, entry of 10 Marzo 1685). Otto Wilhelm von Kenigsmark,
a Swede, led Venice's three campaigns against the Turks (1686). His victory at Nauplia (Napoli), Roumania, enabled the Venetians to take
control of the Morea (Setton, Venice, pp. 296-98). During their mutual participation, a rivalry developed between the Swedes and the Hanoverians.

22 Fabbri and Verti, Due secoli, pp. 44f.

170

A

 1685a
 1685b
 1685c
 1685d

1685/7

4

fo
OOE

1685/8

&

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

(1695), Lucca (1696), Pisa(1701), and Rome (ibid). A festa musicale of the same name (Tullio Hostilio),
set by Draghi on a text by Minato, was given in Linz in 1684.

Scores in D-Mbs;> F-Pc (Reggio, 1686); arias in D-MUs
Listed as Galvani SSal 41; Bonlini 225; Groppo 228; Alm 314

Untitled (for the departure of Margarita Salicola). Cf. Suppl. Sa.
Clio in maschera. Cf. Suppl. 7.
Il trionfo della bellezza. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

La fedelta consolata dalla speranza. Cf. Suppl. Sa.

Gli amori d'Alidaura Music by Domenico Freschi
[THE LOVES OF ALIDAURA]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Maria Piccioli
Performed at the Villa Contarini (Piazzola'!*) SEASON: Summer (Assumption)
With cori SORTING DATE: 1685-08-05

Given in honor of Ernst August?!'

Alidaura, the daughter of the cavalier Arneste, wanted to become a vestal virgin until she fell in love
with Rosmondo, the son of the nobleman Brunoro, whereupon Rosmondo broke his engagement to
Celinda. Gli amori appears to have been the main work ina series of entertainments performed between
the 5th?' and the 10th of August 1685 (M).! The opening scene of Gli amori, an accademia di musica
featuring an ensemble of diverse instruments (coro di vari stromenti), was strongly reminiscent of the
centerpiece of Pallavicino's // Nerone. Instruments were woven into the action in several scenes, and
many couplets spoke of music or employed musical analogies. Alidaura herself played the spinet. Celinda
was accompanied by a chorus of young girls (fanciulle). The concourse of noble men and women in
attendance was said on the 11 th to have been incredible (M).?'* When he left Piazzola the following
week, the duke left a gift of 500 zecchini to all the singers in this group of works (NV).

No musical sources known
Listed as Talbot 10?!

Ermelinda Music by Domenico Freschi
[HERMELINDE]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Maria Piccioli
Performed at the Villa Contarini (Piazzola) SEASON: Summer (Assumption)
With a prologue SORTING DATE: 1685-08-07

Given in honor of Ernst August, Duke of Brunswick

213 The source, an autograph which is not cited in RISM, may represent a performance given in Verona in 1689.

24 On 9 June 1685 Marco Contarini had made his public entry as a procurator.

?!5 The duke of Brunswick and bishop of Osnabriick. The occasion for this and the following performances at Piazzola was the departure of
the Saxon troops who had been quartered in Venice for most of the year. See I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Avvisi, N. 48, entry of XI Agosto 1685.

216 |.Vmc GDC suggests that the 7th was the first date, but this seems to be in error.

2!7 Several shorter items are listed in Suppl. Sa.

2'8 Libretti for all of these works are found in I-Vcg and elsewhere.

2! Sartori 1787 (libretto printed at Piazzola in 1685; I-Vcg 59.A.266/4). Sartori also cites a 1680 print from/for Piazzola (1786).



fi

 1685e
 1685f
 1685g
 1685h
 1685i

 1685}

1685/9

mM

COs

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 171

This revival of 1681/4 involved the accompaniment of wind, string, and keyboard instruments. It was
performed on 7 August 1685 by the figlie of Piazzola's residential music school. A striking scene was
that in which the Queen of Fate descended almost to the proscenium on a machine connected to five
other machines which contained a total of 60 torches. Although the work was undoubtedly abridged,
the performance lasted for two hours.

No musical sources known
No bibliographical listings known!

Il vaticinio della fortuna. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

La schiavitt fortunata di Nettuno. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Il merito acclamato. Cf. Suppl. Sa.

L'orologio del piacere. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Il ritratto della Gloria donata all'Eternita. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Il preludio felice. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Clearco in Negroponte' Music by Domenico Gabrielli
[KLEARCHOS IN NEGROPONTE]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio ArcoleoTM
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1685-12-28

Dedicated to Giorgio Cornaro, N.V2

Klearchos/Clearco was an unpopular Spartan military commander of the fifth century BC who lost an
important battle to Persian forces. Here, as king of Thebes, he was locked in combat with Eurymedes,
the king of Corinth. Several readings are arguably relevant to political affairs of the time.?** Clearco
was in progress by 31 December 1685; the production continued from 4 January 1686 (I-MOas A).
It was revived as 1686/6. Scarlatti's setting of the same text was reportedly given in Naples on 21

December 1686. An anonymous setting (which is likely to have been closely related to this work)
was given in Mantua in 1688. Domenico Gabrielli's setting was presented in Reggio Emilia in 1689.
The libretto offered apologies for the theater's necessary restraints and other impediments reflecting
the austerity of the time as well as for incidents which departed from historical truth. It urged viewers
at least to admire the music of Domenico Gabrielli, whose Rodoaldo [1685/3] was so well received.
A painters' academy was the subject of one of the work's balli.

20 1-Vmc, GDC (Colloq. 200), Reg. 2, f. 107v.

2! Apart from Sartori 9140. Sartori also indicates eighteenth-century settings of the text (composer unidentified) which were prepared for
Prague (9141) and Ferrara (9142).

2 Antonio Arcoleo, a Cretan with a university degree, was the author of three opera libretti, of which this was the first.

23 Cornaro, also a member of the nobility of Candia (although the family name is distinctly Venetian), made his public entry as a procurator
of San Marco on 2 February 1685 (I-MOas A). According to the libretto, he was a physicist of renown.

24 The stage venues lay close to current interests, for the Venetians, through their involvement in the Holy League, were newly involved in
the Aegean; in 1687 they were to capture 15,000 Turks in Attica and Thebes. The port of Negroponte on the large Aegean island of Euboea
had been one of their strongholds in earlier crusades. Thebes was famous at the time for its silk, and Venetian traders regularly provided it
to merchants in the city.

S GO, Griffin (Doc. 28) suggests that the premiere was given on 6 January 1687.

172 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

A Score (Reggio 1689) in I-MOe?6
Listed as Galvani SMoi 25; Bonlini 226; Groppo 229; Alm 315

1685/10 La Didone delirante Music by Carlo Pallavicino
[DiDo DELIRIOUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Franceschi
im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1685-12-26~
is) Dedicated to Franz Anton, Count of Berka'

OO Dido, the legendary founder of Carthage, was so distraught when her brother killed her husband that
she flung herself onto the funeral pyre. In the partially fictional episode recounted in Franceschi's
libretto, the infidelity of Aeneas/Enea was emphasized. La Didone was in progress by 31 December
1685 (I-MOas A). Scarlatti's setting of an adaptation of the text was given in Naples on 19 May 1696.7"
This was a major production featuring mythological gods, a celestial cortege, and dancing monkeys.
Franceschi praised the perfection of Pallavicino's music, which he contrasted to the bareness (nudita)
of his own text. Purcell's Dido and Aeneas, performed at an English girls' school in 1689, was unrelated.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 75; Bonlini 229; Groppo 232; Alm 319

1685/11 Il Demone amante

overo Giugurta" Music attrib. to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[THE POSSESSED LOVER, OR JUGURTHA]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1685-12-29~
& Dedicated to Claudio San Polo?

Jugurtha ruled the western part of Numidia in the second century BC, but after attempting to seize power
in the eastern part, which was ruled by Adherbal, he was executed. Noris described the plot as a caprice
of dramatic fantasy and claimed that the work begins happily, becomes serious, and [finally] heroic.
The ballo was for ghosts.

Oe The first version of this work was in progress by 31 December 1685 (I-MOas A) and probably opened
on the 29th (see below). The Mantuan agent Lorenzo Zanchi, describing on 5 January [1685 M.V.]
an unnamed work which had opened at Sant' Angelo on the preceding Thursday [29 December], reported
many improprieties in the production but also cited the merit of some of the singers. Early in
January Venetian authorities caused the production to be terminated because of its scandalous offense
to the Catholic religion.**' On 11 January 1686 the revised version of the libretto, now entitled Giugurta,

226 Dubowy, Arie und Konzert, p. 311, indicates that I-MOe Mus. F. 424 is by Gabrielli, while -MOe Mus. F. 1054 is by Alessandro Scarlatti.

7 The count, an imperial envoy, had arrived in Venice early in November on a mission to solicit support for the Holy League. The princes
of Brunswick and Savoy had both been injured in the battle of Coron in August. Cf. I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 48, entries of primo 7bre
[Settembre] and X 9bre [Novembre] 1685, f. lv. The mercurio of the following week mentions his presence.

8 See Griffin Doc. 93.
 The general of the Venetian army.

230 1-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1581, entry of 5 Gennaro 1685 M.V. notes that poco meno non li solevasse l'Udienza per conto
le molte improprieta della medesima [opera] ne li leve percid il merito d'alcun deli cantanti che fecero compitamente le parte sua.

3! Mercure, entry for 12 Gennaio 1686: Dal zelo di questo Governo fu fatta sospendere la recita del Teatro di Sant' Angelo che veniva intitolata
Il Diavolo Innamorato, dove si rapresentavano azzioni che rendevano scandolo notabile alla Cattolica Religione, e si sono fatte e sattissime
perquisitioni per castigar severamente gli Attori, alcuni de quali si ritirorono.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 173

was published, suggesting that the production reopened. Despite this inauspicious beginning for the
young Brescian composer, Pollarolo (c. 1657-1723) was to become one of the most prolific opera
composers of his time and a pillar of musical propriety, both at the Teatro di San Giovanni Grisostomo
and at the ducal basilica, San Marco, over the next quarter-century.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SAng 19; Bonlini 232; Groppo 235; Alm 323, 324

1685/12 Teodora augustaTM Music by Domenico Gabrielli
[THEODORA THE AUGUST]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli
ry Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1685-12-26
e Dedicated to Ernst August, Duke of Brunswick
Oo The Eastern Roman Empire was ruled by Theodora with virile prudence after the death of Theophilus/

Teofilo. In this plot Lothar defended the empress against the intrigues of her brother-in-law, Osman.
Theodora had opened before 31 December 1685 (I-MOas A); it is likely to have started on or about
the 26th. Groppo indicates that the work was intended for the autumn season of 1685; the title-page
was dated 1686.** Scarlatti's setting of this text was given in Naples on 6 November 1692.

A Arias in F-Pn; I-Mc?35
Listed as Galvani SSal 42; Bonlini 228; Groppo 231; Alm 317, 318

1686/1 Amore innamorato Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[BEING IN LOVE WITH LOVE]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli; scuola da schermaTM e da ballo SORTING DATE: 1686-01-19
rs) Dedicated to Sophia Dorothea, Princess of Brunswick*'
O Venus was jealous of the beauty of Psyche and schemed with Cupid to play various tricks on her

competitor.* Amore innamorato was first performed on 19 January 1686 (M; I-MOas A).? An
imprimatur on the final page of some librettiTM is dated 10 January [1686]. Now that the theater had

>8 Saunders, Repertoire, p. 105.

233 Pollarolo served as vice maestro (1690-92) and ultimately as maestro di cappella (1692-1723).
244 The stage engineer, Gasparo Torelli, wrote the dedication of this libretto.

235 On the Milan source, see Dubowy, Arie und Konzert, p. 318.

256 Venice had several scuole [organizations] to teach fencing and other skills (including the playing of musical instruments) to adolescent
males (Gastone Vio, forthcoming in Recercare).

237 Wife (1666-1726) and cousin of Georg Ludwig (the future King George I of England). She was illegitimate at her birth to Georg Wilhelm
(1624-1705) and Eleonore d'Olbreuse, was engaged to Friedrich August of Brunswick, whose death their marriage precluded. Her marriage
to the prince in 1682 was designed to thwart her affair with the count Philipp Christoph von Kenigsmark (1665-94), who was murdered by
courtiers of Ernst August. After her lover's death, Sophie Dorothea was imprisoned. This left her husband free to attend to his mistresses,
chief among which was Countess Melusine von Schulenburg (1667-1743; in 1721 she became Lady Kendall). At the time of this premiere,
the arrival of the dedicatee and other German noblewomen was still awaited (see I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 48, entry of 19 Gennaro 1686).

38 The text was not particularly related to the like-named one of G, B. Fusconi (set to music by Francesco Cavalli), which was performed
at San Moise in 1642.

29 The 21st is given as the opening date in a report of the Mantuan agent Lorenzo Zanchi (I-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1581).
An awviso of the 19th (I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 49, entry of 19 Gennaro 1686) points out that the dedicatee had not yet arrived in Venice.

24 E.g., US-LAu 321 and I-Veg 59.A.136/3; this date is not found in US-LAu 322 or in I-Veg 59.A.136/4.

174

1686/2

1686/3

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

lost Salicola and Cecchi as cast members, it may have been intent on creating new distractions for the
audience. The cast had strong Mantuan ties: Clarice Gigli took the role of Psyche, with Barbara Riccioni
as Venus and Angiola [Angela] Salicola (the sister of Margarita) as Juno. Other singers were Carl' Antonio
Rata (Amore), Antonio Borosini (Zeseo), Gio. Battista Galon (Ercole), Tomaso Boni (Lesbo), and
Signore Salvador (Mercurio).

The production included six balli, one of which was for twenty-four little Cupids (amori) who, in
two groups, formed interwoven patterns as they circulated with lighted torches.' The depiction of
a School of Fencing and Dancing was singular but later much imitated. The work was also full of allusions
to Venetian spectacles, including those associated with Giovedi Grasso. In one scene Hercules conquered
a lion and a dragon, in another Jupiter mounted an eagle, and in another the flight of Love was
represented. Venus and Juno arrived in a carriage filled with doves.

Arias in I-MOe*?

Listed as Galvani SGG 13; Bonlini 231; Groppo 234; Alm 321, 322

L'amazzone corsara Music by Carlo Pallavicino

owvero L'Alvilda, regina de' Goti
[THE AMAZON WHO WAS A CORSAIR, OR ALVILDA, QUEEN OF THE GOTHS]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1686-02-04~

Dedicated to Francesco Duodo and Loredana Tron, NN.VV.24

The beautiful and virtuous Alvilda, the queen of the Goths, had refused matrimony with Alf, the king
of the Danes. Becoming a warrior instead, she had many adventures before Alf finally conquered her
with scorn (the true weapon for winning an obstinate woman, according to Corradi). This may have
been the most beautiful opera mentioned by the Mantuan agent Lorenzo Zanchi, in his report of 9
February 1685 M.V., as having opened within the past week. An imprimatur on the final page of
the libretto is dated 1 February 1686, but an opening before the 4th is unlikely. A note to the reader
of the libretto says that the composer, having already produced a miracle in the theaters, had now
produced a miracle of miracles. L amazzone opened with a trumpet fanfare." Alessandro Scarlatti's
setting of this text was given in Naples on 6 November 1689.

Scores in D-Mbs;"* I-Ne (Naples, 1689); arias in GB-Ob
Listed as Galvani SSGP 76; Bonlini 234; Groppo 237; Alm 326

Il Licurgo

ovvero II cieco d'acuta vista Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[LYCURGUS, OR THE BLIND MAN WITH SHARP EYES]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Matteo Noris

>! Alm, Winged Feet, p. 234.

2 The scene brings to mind Joseph Addison's account of the sparrows being delivered to a London performance of Italian opera (Spectator,
6 March 1711). According to it, the sparrows were song-birds assisted by a band of flageolets behind the scenes.

43 See Dubowy, Arie und Konzert, p. 318.

> The Duodo and Tron families were both historically associated with San Cassiano, which was then closed.

>45 When the work was revived in 1688, Pallade veneta repeated the characterization of her as a Venus of beauty and a Pallas of valor.
>46 1.MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1581.

47 The 1688 production was better documented (see below).

248 Facs. edn. in IOB, 13.

r1

1686/4

mM

O

1686/5

M1

Fay
O

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 175

Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1686-02-05
Without dedication

In legend the Thracian king Lycurgus, who decorated his gates with the corpses of those he had murdered,
was blinded by Dionysios. Here, according to Noris's note, the plot was altered to suit certain [important]
people. An imprimatur of 5 February 1685 [M.V.] appears in some prints of the libretto. The title-page
is dated 1686. Zanchi's report of February 1685 M.V." suggests that this was, like L 'amazzone corsara
[1686/2], a most beautiful work in its presentation.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SAng 20; Bonlini 235; Groppo 238; Alm 327

Le generose gare tra Cesare e Pompeo Music by Domenico Gabrielli
[THE RIVALRY BETWEEN CAESAR AND POMPEY]

A dramma per musica Text by Rinaldo Cialli
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1686-02-09

Dedicated to Maximilian Wilhelm, Prince of Brunswick?>!

The rivalry between Caesar and the consul Pompey in the first century BC was hardly friendly. Although
this plot involved their wives (Junia and Cornelia), militarism and heroism were underscored, perhaps
in homage to the dedicatee, who was an increasingly important commander of troops sponsored by
the Holy League. An imprimatur on the final page of the libretto is dated 9 February 1685, which is
the more veneto date of opening given by the Mantuan agent Lorenzo Zanchi. The title-page is dated
1686. Cialli praised Gabrielli's virtuous, bizarre, and spirited notes, which, with the harmonic chords
of his, tie his name to fortune and glory.

Score in I-MOe
Listed as Galvani SSal 43; Bonlini 236; Groppo 239; Alm 328

Il Seiano moderno della Tracia Music attributed to Francesco Rossi'?

ovvero La caduta dell'ultimo gran visir
[THE MODERN SEIANUS FROM THRACE, OR THE FALL OF THE LAST GRAND VISIR]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Girapoli?TM*
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With ballo** SORTING DATE: 1686-02-09

Dedicated to Gasparo Altieri, N.V.

The subject was a Turkish Grand Visir (the modern Seianus, as opposed to the Roman figure of the
first century AD featured in 1667/2 and 1667/4). The ballo was for Turkish men and women. Like the

249 Eg, US-LAu 327 and I-Veg 59.A.108/7.

250 |-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1581.

25! The third son (1666-1727) of Ernst August. See Suppl. 5a.

252 1_MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1581, entry of 9 Febraro 1685 M.V. The work is cited as Le famose gare...

53 Rossi was said to be an abbot from Puglia and was probably therefore the same person as don [Nicolo] Francesco [de] Rossi from Bari.
Ithas recently been claimed, however, that he was not the Francesco Rossi who was elected maestro di cappella at the Ospedale de' Mendicanti
on 22 July 1689, but since the Mendicanti figure was also an abbot, the possibility hardly seems to be excluded. A third don Francesco Rossi
played the violone at San Marco from 1669 until 1691 or later.

254 This is the only libretto by Girapoli.

55 Depicting a conferenza tra '1 suono e 'I canto.

176

1686/6

fi

 1686a
 1686b
 1686
 1686d
 1686e
 1686f
 1686g
 1686h

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

preceding work, this one showed a preoccupation with the endeavors of the Holy League. The libretto

was dedicated on 9 February 1685, which must be M.V. because the title-page is dated 1686. According
to Bonlini, Seiano closed on its opening night without being completed because it pleased no one.**
No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SMoi 26; Bonlini: 230; Groppo 233; Alm 320

Clearco in Negroponte' Music by Domenico Gabrielli
[KLEARCHOS IN NEGROPONTE]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Arcoleo*?
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1686-02-16~

Dedicated to the Baroness of Platen

Circumstantial evidence suggests that this revival of 1685/9 was given later in the same contractual
year as the original production, perhaps to fill in for the abrupt termination of Seiano (see above). Many
German noblewomen arrived in Venice during the last two weeks of January 1686 (I-Rvat A), and troops
of the duke of Hanover remained in Venice through Lent (A). Gabrielli's setting was presented in Reggio
Emilia in 1689. A note to the reader again recommended the extravagant incidents of the plot and
attributed them to luck rather than design.

Score (Reggio Emilia, 1689) in I-MOe
Listed as Galvani SMoi 27; Bonlini 233; Groppo 236; Alm 325

Seleuco. Cf. Suppl. 8.

Entertainment for Count Melgara. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
Serenata for the duke of Hanover. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
Amor sincero. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Le gare delle lodi. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

La fuga all' otio. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Auridalba. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

La mente solicitata. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

256 The province of Thrace, an early Venetian holding, lay to the west of the Hellespont.

257 Sartori 21452.

258 Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 105. Bonlini takes issue with Ivanovich's statement that the work was never performed.

25 Dott. Antonio Arcoleo was from Candia.

26 In the dedication of the libretto (signed by Abbot Badi) the merits of the duke of Hanover (Ernst August) are praised. This would lead one
to believe that the dedicatee was his wife, Sophia Benedetta of the Palatine (see 1686/1), who was much admired for her intellect as well as
her cultural and botanical contributions to the court at Brunswick. But the dedicatee, whom Groppo (MS, p. 111) styles madama marascialla
baronessa Platen di Hanover) appears to refer to the duke's mistress, Klara Elisabeth von Meysenburg, wife of the philosopher Franz Ernst,
the baron of Platen-Hallermund, who served as a master to the children of Ernst August (among them Georg Ludwig/George I of England).
Klara gave birth to a daughter (Sophia Charlotte, b. 1675) who was raised as a half-sister of the same children. (The baroness of Platen featured
in Heinrich von Kleist's Prinz Friedrich von Homburg (1811) would have been a figure of c. 1655-60.)

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 177

1686/7 Zenocrate, ambasciatore a' macedoni' Music attributed to Pietro Porfiri2"
[ZENOCRATES, AMBASSADOR TO THE MACEDONIANS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed Marc' Antonio Gasparini?
Mr Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1686-11-29~
& Dedicated to Alvise Morelli, N.V.2
Ow Zenocrates, a philosopher of upright character, was the Calcedonian ambassador to Macedonia when

it was ruled by Philip in the third century BC. The excesses of the Macedonian court were alien to
Zenocrates, whom Philip considered to be mad. This production re-opened on 28 December 1686 (I-MOas
A), indicating that the work's premiere would have been given before the Novena of Christmas and
perhaps before the start of Advent, thus in late November. Many scenes appealed to customs of the
established Venetian nobility (the dedicatee was newly raised to this status). Among these were the
academy of cavalry exercises (Act One), the gallery for pictures, sculpture, and antiques (Act Two),
and the hunt in the hills (Act Three).

A Arias in F-Pn
Listed as Galvani SMoi 28; Bonlini 241; Groppo 244; Alm 335

1686/8 Elmiro, re di Corinto* Music attributed to Carlo Pallavicino
[ELMER, KING OF CORINTH]
A melodramma in musica Text attributed to Vincenzo Grimani
11 Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With intrecci and a combattimento SORTING DATE: 1686-12-26
rs) Dedicated to Domenico Orsini, Duke of Gravina?

Corinth, which controlled the isthmus connecting mainland Greece to the Peloponnese, was of crucial
military importance both in antiquity and at the time this work was produced. Peisistratos, the Athenian
tyrant, sent his sons to try to outwit the young Corinthian king Elmer, who had caused offense by refusing
to offer the hand of his daughter Idalma in marriage.

O# Elmiro was first performed on 26 December 1686 (M; I-MOas A). The title-page bears the dates
M.DC.LXXXVII at the top and M.DC.LXXXVI at the bottom. Variant libretti were dedicated on 25
and 26 December 1686. The work was noted for its spectacular scenery, its acting and singing, and
its opening sinfonia (M). Particularly memorable were its intrecci (two in Act Two and one in Act Three),
cued in the libretto as bali. In the first, for Turks and Moors, the action took place on a machine carried
by twenty-four soldiers. In the second, the followers of Peace and the followers of War were disgorged

6! Porfiri (also Porferi) was a Venetian priest (c. 1640-after 1714). He served in numerous posts in and around Pesaro, and his five subsequent
operas were produced in that vicinity.

?6 No first name is given in the libretto. The attribution is Alm's.

6 Alvise Morelli owned a Murano glass factory, which between 1667 and 1673 accepted commissions from London merchants including
Michael Measey and John Greene. This suggests that Morelli was responsible for occasional stage sets of crystal (e.g., in Le muse in maschera,
Suppl. 6). The Venetian glass industry was being undermined at the time by a cheaper manufacturing process developed in France.

264 An extended run is also signaled by the fact that there were three editions of the libretto (Groppo MS, p. 113).
265 With revisions attributed to Girolamo Frisari. Caffi's notes incorrectly give Giuseppe Tosi as the composer.
266 The Orsini were a powerful Roman family that boasted three popes and numerous other dignitaries.

?67 Venetian bombs had exploded Turkish gunpowder stored in the Parthenon (an ancient temple built in honor of the goddess Athena) just
a few months before this work was given. Still more recently the Turks had been defeated at Nauplia (Roumania). Thus a work of this kind,
particularly when written by a super-patriot such as Vincenzo Grimani, could be read as a celebration of victory.

268 According to Groppo (MS, p. 113), Grimani's text was intentionally anonymous.

178 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

onto the stage from the mouth of a monster. The battle of the Athenians and Corinthians in Act Three
was especially well received.

A Arias in GB-Ob; I-Rvat; PV?
Listed as Galvani SGG 14; Bonlini 239; Groppo 242; Alm 333

1686/9 Tl Maurizio" Music by Domenico Gabrielli
[MAURICE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli?'
M1 Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1686-12-26
o Dedicated to Ranuccio II Farnese, Duke of Parma
 Tiberius conceded his crown as Eastern Roman Emperor to Maurice in 582. He also betrothed his

daughter Ormisda to his successor. The coronation and wedding of Maurice [Mauritius Tiberius] bring
this work to its conclusion. Maurizio was first performed on 26 (M) or 27 December 1686 (I-MOas
A), although the title-page is dated 1687. Variant libretti were both dedicated on 25 December 1686;

the imprimatur is dated 20 December 1686.

Qo The cast was given in Pallade veneta, where the work was reported to have been well sung and well

acted and in consequence to have been received with unusual applause (applauso non ordinario).
A dedicatory sonnet to one of the singers, Barbara Riccioni, and an arietta were included. Ina preface
to the libretto, Gasparo Torelli praised the singular music of Domenico Gabrielli, which on other
occasions has elicited greater applause than the scenery. A simplified version of Maurizio's aria
Venticelli che tacete, which constituted the pivotal scene of the work, was also included in Pallade
veneta. Contemplating the prospect of controlling the Byzantine empire, Maurizio implored the breezes
to assuage his sense of anxiety. In a production of the work given in 1689 in Modena, Venticelli became
an interrupted aria (i.e., recitative was inserted into it). An obbligato theorbo was used in the Modenese
production, and there is a good chance it was used in the Venetian production as well.' Revivals of
Maurizio, which were numerous and widespread, extended into the first years of the eighteenth century.

A Score (Modena, 1689) in I-MOe; arias (Venice, 1686) in Pallade veneta; F-Pn; I-MOe, Rva
Listed as Galvani SSal 44; Bonlini 238; Groppo 241; Alm 331, 332

2 Pallade veneta, pp. 134-43, 145. The only members of the cast who have been identified are Catterina Dure (Caffi, op. cit.) or Ducre (Pallade
veneta), who took the role of Idalma, and Tomaso Bovi (Lesbo). Despite its popularity in Venice, E/miro had only one revival, with altered
music, in Vicenza (1693; Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 382).

27 Cara speranza, which was appended to the Gennaro 1687 issue, is transcribed on pp. 127f. of Pallade veneta.
77! The Weavers (Florentine Theater, p. 208) point out that a Roman setting of 1692 named Nicold Minato as the poet.

2 Pallade veneta, pp. 143f. The singers were Domenico Cecchi (Il Cortona) in the title role, with Giuseppe Scaccia (Tiberio), Francesco
Antonio Pistocchi (Cosroe), Francesca Catarina (Ergilda), Barbara Riccioni (Placilla), Margherita Mugnai (Cirene), Antonio Borghi (Ircano),
and Bastiano Orfei (Leno). On 5 October 1686 Cecchi's participation had been uncertain, according to a letter from Filippo Bartalli (I-MAas,
AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1581). San Salvatore was negotiating a contract for the season with him. The journalist noted that he owed
the singer recognition per uno de' suoi semitoni.

23 Bella ceder inconvien, eccoti il core. The first letters of each line of the sonnet form an acrostic of the singer's name: BARB ARAR ICI
ONI (see Pallade veneta, Illustration 11).

274 A commentary on and comparative edition of both versions of the aria appear in E. Selfridge-Field, Pallade veneta, pp. 82f and 95-125.
Riccioni's Che m'inganni quel bel volto from Act Two, Scene | of the first version of the work (it was eliminated in later versions) is reproduced
in Pallade veneta, pp. 126f.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 179

cm Pa a 8A nde A a, { ag eet Oe art ty rE

Ot te fn se a ee ae et en
Ana pans meet ce es PR gg es
Bd

ay Pe eg ee et Seal

ae ee tt
ae

nd i oe ad Ang el at a tt |

=8 Seporeeierererta ores

tl ad a gn da gh
a ee ee te a te

nh ns a ag

Raitt che ta cere

sey st

=
ee

ILLUSTRATION 12. Leaf of Maurizio's aria Venticelli che tacete from Domenico Gabrielli's Maurizio (1686/9). This version,
which appeared in the January 1687 issue of Pallade veneta, is significantly reduced in instrumental requirements from the full-
score version preserved in I-MOe. (Private collection.)

celli che ta- ce- te rifponde st - te

Pt ae we

1686/10 _ Il Vizio depresso e la Virti' coronata' Music by Teofilo Orgiani?
[VICE DEPOSED AND VIRTUE CROWNED]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
im Performed at Sant' Angelo Season: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli Sorting date: 1686-12-27
& Dedicated to Louis, Prince of Turenne?
od In the text, which is loosely derived from Eliogabalo (1667/6), Alexander was raised by his

notoriously dissolute? cousin Elagabalus, who was eventually murdered. Upon becoming the

emperor [222-238], Alexander, who was no less virtuous than just, assumed the name Severus. //
Vizio opened on 27 December 1686 (I-MOas A), despite a dedication date of 24 November 1686 in
one version of the libretto; the title-page was dated 1687.

275 Orgiani was a priest from Vicenza who was to hold a series of posts in Friuli (Trieste, Aquileia, Udine), Austria, and (eventually) in his
native city. He had first set this work in 1671 for performance in Bologna. His setting now is thought to have been based on G. B.
Pocchettini's revisions of Aureli's text.

276 Although barely out of adolescence, the 18-year-old Viscount of Turenne, who was currently a field marshall of Louis XIV, led a regiment
in the siege of Negroponte (1688).

277 & revised version (US-LAu 330; same date of dedication) takes the title L Eliogabalo rifformato.

278 In this text, one evidence of his decadence was that he permitted women to run the Roman senate.

180

1686/11

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

The singer Angelica Vittaloni (Fulvia) was praised in the Febraro 1687 issue of Pallade veneta' for
the naturalness and gracefulness of her singing. With sweet singing you tyrannize the heart, an
anonymous sonneteer wrote.* Ina revised version the cori were eliminated, the balli recast, and number
of roles reduced.

Arias in F-Pn
Listed as Galvani SAng 21; Bonlini 237; Groppo 240; Alm 329, 330

La Gierusalemme liberata Music by Carlo Pallavicino
[JERUSALEM LIBERATED]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo and a combattimento SORTING DATE: 1686-12-28~

Dedicated to Charles Montagu, Earl of Manchester*

Based on Tasso's account of the First Crusade, the Christians, including Geoffrey/Goffredo and
Ronald/Rinaldo, are pitted against the Saracens, among whom are Clorinda and Armide, in the battle
for Jerusalem. The Crusaders' intention was to make the holy city the seat of Latin power in the East.
The theme was pervasive on the Italian (especially the Venetian) stage. According to one report (I-MOas
A), Gierusalemme opened on 28 December 1686. The imprimatur of the UCLA libretto is 3 January
1687. It presumably corresponds to the version reported first to have been performed on 4 January 1687
(M, A).

Gierusalemme opened with a pompous scene and a noble ballo. It was particularly noted for its battle
scene, which involved 80 participants and is vividly described in Pallade veneta. A visiting Roumanian
Shah found the singers enchanting and believed the soldiers to be real. He asked whether the musicians
could come to his home every evening. Upon being informed that their time was claimed by the theater,
and further that Venice maintained several such theaters, he exclaimed that he thought it unfair that
God should bestow all of his benefits on Christians.

A lavish production was given in Dresden on 2 February 1687. It featured Margarita Salicola in the
role of Armide. She cannot have sung in the Venetian production, for the one aria (Voglia per forza)
preserved in Pallade veneta lies in a substantially lower range than the same aria preserved in the Dresden
score. Although the work was sung in Italian, a German translation of Corradi's libretto, with a dedication
to Johann Georg III by Stefano Benedetto Pallavicino, was issued by the Saxon court press.
Scores in US-LAu (Venice); B-Br (modern copy); and D-DIb (Dresden); arias in PV;* F-Pn; I-Rvat
Listed as Galvani SSGP 77; Bonlini 240; Groppo 243; Alm 334

2 Pallade veneta, pp. 64-6. Although the work is not specifically identified, // vizio depresso was the only work of the season with a role

for Fulvia.

28 The sonnet is reproduced in Pallade veneta, illustration facing p. 224.

?8! Charles Montagu (1660-1721) was the fourth ear! and first duke of Manchester. Kimbolton Castle, his residence in Cambridgeshire, became
a great repository for Venetian painting in the early years of the eighteenth century.

2 Pallade veneta, p.145.

?8 The work was staged with the German translation of Fiedler in Bamberg in 1695.

284 Ed. Hermann Abert, DDT, Vol. 55 (Leipzig, 1916), pp. 70ff. The Dresden score is complemented by instrumental parts, some of which
are on Venetian paper. For particulars, see E. Selfridge-Field, Introduction to Pallavicino's Messalina (DMV, viii).

85 The variant parts for the aria Voglio per forza (higher in Dresden, lower in Venice) are shown in the transcription in Selfridge-Field,
Pallade veneta, pp. 129-130.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 181

1687/1 Il Dioclete Music by Teofilo Orgiani
[DIOCLETIAN]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Andrea Rossini
M1 Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1687-01-21~
& Dedicated to Torrismondo della Torre**
@ Following his victory in Persia, Diocletian was proclaimed emperor [284 AD]. He succeeded Numerianus,

the younger son of Carus. Diocletian was challenged by Carinus, the older son of Carus. One libretto''

with an imprimatur of 15 January 1686 was dedicated on 18 January 1686. Both dates must be M.V.,

since the title-page is dated 1687.*8 The work may have opened for the start of Carnival on the 21st.
A Arias in F-Pn

Listed as Galvani SAng 22; Bonlini 242; Groppo 245; Alm 336, 337

1687/2 Elena rapita da Paride Music by Domenico Freschi*
[HELEN ABDUCTED BY PARIS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giacomo Fr. Bussani
i Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1687-01-21~
& Dedicated to Cornelio Pepoli, P.V., and Maria Cattarina Bentivoglio, N.V.2
 Homer's tale of Helen's abduction by Paris seems an odd textual choice for a work dedicated to a

betrothed couple. In this account, Paris's betrayal of the Trojan nymph Enon played an important role."!

The libretto for this revised version of 1677/1 was dedicated on 18 January 1687. It is likely to have
opened on or shortly after the 21st.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SMoi 29; Bonlini 243; Groppo 246; Alm 338

1687/3 Flavio Cuniberto Music attributed to Gian Domenico Partenio
[FLAVIUS CUNIBERT]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and a combattimento SORTING DATE: 1687-01-25~
& Dedicated to Eugene, Prince of Savoy?

286 He was the count of Duino, an imperial holding on the Istrian peninsula near Trieste and field marshal of Friuli. Orgiani was in his service
for much of the 1680s. (My cordial thanks to Alba Zanini for numerous consultations on musicians in Friuli in this period.)

87 US-LAu 337. Groppo (MS, p. 113) indicates that there were three editions of the libretto.
288 US-LAu 336 is a duplicate but has no imprimatur.
2 With some arias by Francesco Navarra, a Roman priest who was maestro di cappella to the duke of Milan.

? The common link between the families of the betrothed seems to have been provided by their country estates near Bologna. Count Pepoli
had earned the enmity of his neighbors by limiting hunting on his properties to members of his own family (1682). Because of this marriage
the Bentivoglio villa passed in the nineteenth century to the Pepoli family.

?*' Giovanni Rossi (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613) claimed that Le due rivali in amore (1728/7) used the same text, but the emphasis is somewhat
different.

> Eugene of Savoy (1663-1736) was to become a highly visible field marshal and statesman. He twice fought on the Austrian side against
the Turks (in the wars of the 1680s and 1690s) and against the French in the War of the Spanish Succession. His triumphs occurred at such
battles as those of Vienna (1683), Blenheim (1704), and Belgrade (1716). As a military leader he was a teacher of Frederick the Great and
a model for Napoleon. He was rumored to be an illegitimate child of Louis XIV, who reportedly had an affair with Olimpia Mancini, Eugene's
mother and a niece of Cardinal Mazarin. In 1687 Eugene was admitted to the Order of the Golden Fleece.

182 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

i) This revised version of 1681/6 seems to have opened late in January 1687. The dedicatee had arrived
by the 25th (M). Other members of the royal family of Savoy were present through the second week
of February. The duke of Savoy was received by the doge on 1 March 1687.7

) The singing of Catterina Ducre, who took the role of Theodata, was praised both in prose and in a sonnet
in the February 1687 issue of Pallade veneta. Her aria Prestami |'ali d'amor, which is cited in the
report, was new to the 1687 version of the work.' A laudatory sonnet in her honor paraphrased the
aria text and its rhyme scheme. The only other identified member of the cast was Tomaso Boni (Vitige).*

if) Score (Acts 1, 3 only) in A-Wn; arias in I-MOe, Vqs; Pallade veneta
Listed as Galvani SGG 15; Bonlini 244; Groppo 247; Alm 339

 1687a Oronte. Cf. Suppl. 5b.

1687/4 L'inganno regnante Music by Marc' Antonio Ziani

ovvero L'Atanagilda, regina di Gottia
[THE DECEPTION THAT PREVAILED, OR ATHANAGILDE, QUEEN OF THE GOTHS]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
ry Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With sonate * SORTING DATE: 1687-12-26

Dedicated to Ernst August, Duke of Brunswick

OB

In this medieval Gothic tale, King Olderic, lacking male heirs, reluctantly signed a pact to relinquish
his throne to Rudolf. Later regretting his agreement, he raised his daughter Athanagilde as the mock
prince Gismond. The plot unraveled when the prince fell in love with his/her general Orontes. The
production of this work was in progress by 27 December 1687 (I-MOas A), suggesting that it opened
on the 26th (A). The title-page of the libretto, dated 1688, praised two prodigies  the composer
Ziani for his harmony and the set designer Gio. Battista Lambranzi for his beautiful colors.*

fi Arias in GB-Lbl, Ob; I-MOe, Rvat
Listed as Galvani SSGP 78; Bonlini 248; Groppo 251; Alm 344

1688/1 La fortuna tra le disgrazie Music by Paolo Biego
[FORTUNE AMONG MISFORTUNES]
A dramma per musica Text by Rinaldo Cialli
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1688-01-19
& Dedicated to Francesco Savorgnano, Count of Belgrade?

2% Baschet, Histoire, p. 494.

This aria replaced Costanza, gradita costanza in the 1681 version, in which the same role had been taken by Clarice Gigli. Cf. Pallade
veneta, p. 157.

?%5 Identified in Caffi, loc. cit., and Saunders, Repertoire, p. 453.

2% Manuscripts identified by Norbert Dubowy (Partenio's Flavio, p. 344). Winton Dean (Handel's Operas) was the first to notice that Noris
conflated the account of Paul the Deacon (fl. 8th century) with Corneille's Le Cid.

2 A sonata for harp and violin was to be given at the end of Act I, and a sonata for harp and viola at the end of Act II. The harpist Benedetto
Carli had been regularly employed at San Marco since 1669 (Selfridge-Field, Venetian Instrumental Music, p. 340).

28 Although there is no known relationship to the set designer Gregorio Lambranzi, who collected the music and choreographic illustrations
published in Nuova e curiosa scuola de' balli theatrali (1716), the surname was not common. Gio. Battista Lambranzi was active at SS. Giovanni
e Paolo from c. 1663 through this production and worked briefly at San Salvatore in 1695.

> This nobleman from Friuli was a procurator of San Marco.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 183

OO In this wholly invented tale, the Damascan princess Irene was promised to the Armenian prince Alindo.
A series of potential threats failed to prevent the marriage. La fortuna, first performed on 19 January

1688 (A; I-MOas A), was noted for its scenery and dances, and for the singing of Bernardo da Rimini.*

ES Simulations of nature were emphasized in the staging, perhaps to acknowledge the respect in which
Savorgnano's own gardens in both Venice and Udine were held. Swans swam; stags were pursued by
hunters, archers, and dogs; fountains overflowed; artificial thunder was heard and lightning seen. The
leaves of trees and flowers fluttered in the breeze. Audiences were terrified by a tall giant who raised
the curtain (this gimmick was used in many other works). A ballo at the end of Act One was for
hunchbacks. The heathen ways of Zoroastrians were portrayed in Act Two. After genuflecting to the
Sun, they were shown celebrating the sacrifice of a victim.

fi Arias in GB-Ob; I-MOe
Listed as Galvani SAng 23; Bonlini 246; Groppo 249; Alm 341

1688/2 Il Gordiano Music by Domenico Gabrielli
[GORDIAN]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli
ry Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1688-01-21
wz Dedicated to Maximilian Wilhelm, Prince of Brunswick

After rescuing the Roman campaign in Africa, the proconsul Gordian was declared emperor [238 AD].
Weeks later, after the death of his son in battle, he committed suicide. This account was fictionalized
and admitted two allegorical figures  Italy and Venus.

OO 2 Il Gordiano was first performed on 21 January 1688 (A; I-MOas A). Architectural aspects of the staging
were emphasized in the accounts of both Pallade veneta and the Swedish architect Nicodemus Tessin.
Villages, piazzas, courtyards, salons, galleries, the city irrigation system, and ground-floor rooms were
all mentioned in relation to changes of perspective. Pallade veneta noted the inventiveness of the
poetic intrigues.*' Tessin observed that the final scene made a beautiful effect by placing flickering
candles behind the almond-shaped window cutouts in every drape of the backdrop. *?

A Score in I-MOe; arias in GB-Ob; I-MOe, Rvat
Listed as Galvani SSal 45; Bonlini 247; Groppo 250; Alm 342, 343

1688/3 La Corilda Music attributed to Francesco Rossi

overo L'amore trionfante della vendetta
[CoRILDA, OR LOVE TRIUMPHANT OVER REVENGE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Paolo Emilio Badi*TM
V1 Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1688-01-22
& Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua

Onxe Olynthos, the king of Crete, killed the son of Arsakes, the king of Cyprus, in a duel. He then married
Corilda, the sister of the deceased, whose hand was offered by her father in a gesture of peace. She
resented her new situation and attempted to escape. La Corilda was first performed on 22 January 1688

3 Pallade veneta, pp. 201-2. The original source (Pallade veneta, issue of Genn. 1688, p. 64) apparently errs in reporting the opening date
to have been 9 January.

3! Pallade veneta, p. 204.
3 Mancini et al., Teatri, i/1, 268, citing Bjurnstrom. Tessin said that each slit was oleata  shaped like the leaf of an oleander.
3 This was the first of several libretti that the abbot Badi wrote for San Moise, but see 1686/6.

184 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

(A; I-MOas A). Its colorful backdrops, its balli, and the performance styles (manieri) of its singers were
noted. The vivacious colors of the work's galleries, temples, amphitheaters, and loges were offset
by terrifying scenes of woods and prisons  all painted on cloth. The Dance of the [Three] Graces

was noted,  possibly because of the costumes, since a later dance of dame e cavalieri was not
mentioned.
A Arias in I-MOe

Listed as Galvani SMoi 30; Bonlini 250; Groppo 253; Alm 346

1688/4 L'amazzone corsara

ovvero L' Alvilda, regina de' Goti Music by Carlo Pallavicino
[THE AMAZON WHO WAS A CORSAIR, OR ALVILDA, QUEEN OF THE GOTHS]
A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
i Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a scuola di scherma, balli, and several danze SORTING DATE: 1688-01-24
& Dedicated to Nicold Grimaldi, Marquis di Bourbon?

Ow  This revival of 1686/2 had opened by 24 January 1688 (A; I-MOas A). The current production cycle,
in which this was the second opera, was noted for its costumes and naturalistic scenery (e.g., flower
gardens and fountains), the latter enhanced by the evocative playing (in imitation of sibilant breezes)
of viole and violini. It was said that the work's seven singers must have learned their art under the
masterful wings of Apollo.

A Arias in GB-Ob; I-MOe
Listed as Galvani SSGP 79; Bonlini 251; Groppo 254; Alm 347

1688/5 Orazio Music attributed to Giuseppe Felice Tosi*
[HoratTIo]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Vincenzo Grimani, N.V.
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a giuoco, combattimento, and ballo SORTING DATE: 1688-01-24
& Dedicated to Maximilian II Emanuel, Duke of Bavaria
i) The Roman legend of Horatio/Orazio, who vanquished the Curiatians, provides the basis for this plot.

Here Horatio's sister Junia/Giunia was in love with one of the Curiazi brothers, who were siblings of
his own wife, Sabine.2 Orazio was first performed on or shortly before 24 January 1688 (A; MOas
A). Its libretto was dedicated on 16 January 1688.*"' The story itself was retold in later operas, including
Sografi's (1746/7).

3% Pallade veneta, p. 204.

3% The motive of the Three Graces was a current one. Pallade veneta, in its March 1688 issue, termed the three sisters who sang songs by
J.-B. Lully at a superb academy of instruments in the home of Giovanni Legrenzi le tre Gratie. (See Pallade veneta, p. 214.)

3 Commander of the cavalry of the Venetian Republic.
3 Pallade veneta, p. 204.

38 Tosi (1619-93), a singer and organist, was a founder of the Accademia Filarmonica. He spent most of his life in Bologna. His son Pier Francesco
was the author of a widely known work, Opinioni de' cantori antichi e moderni (Bologna, 1723).

3 Possibly rev. Girolamo Frisari, following Bonlini, who says (Le glorie, p. 110) that the libretto was by the same author as that of Elmiro,
Re di Corinto.

3!0 The anonymous author acknowledges indebtedness to Pierre Corneille [via Horace, 1640].

3" The elector of Bavaria, who had first attended the carnival in Mantua, did not arrive in Venice until after 21 February (M).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 185

Owe The cast was markedly changed from those of earlier years at San Giovanni Grisostomo. Vittoria Tarquini
(La Bombaci; here Giunia) appears to have made her Venetian debut in this work. Other cast members
were Giacomo Filippo Cabella in the title role, Laura Spada (Sabina), Tomaso Boni (Leno), Nicola
Tricarico (Flavio), Alessandro Girardini (Curiatio), an unnamed bass from Bologna (Tullo), a not-fully-
identified Gio. Maria (Decio), and a Servite priest (Floro).>! The battle of the Orazi and Curiazi (Act
Two) and the dance of the Moors (Act Three) merited special mention.''3 On 24 January the Grand
Prince [Ferdinand] of Tuscany, having been invited by Abbot Grimani to hear an exceptional singer
(brava cantatrice), probably Tarquini, presented her with a diamond worth 100 scudi, 8 doppie (M)."*

fi Arias in GB-Ob; I-MOe, Rvat
Listed as Galvani SGG 16; Bonlini 249; Groppo 252; Alm 345

1688/6 La Floridea, r egina di Cipro* Music by multiple composers*!
[FLORIDEA, QUEEN OF CYPRUS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giulio Pancieri*"*
i Performed at SS. Apostoli* SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With choruses SORTING DATE: 1688-01-24
rs) Dedicated to Quintiliano Rezzonico, N.V.3
Oo In Cypriot history, Floridea put her father and brother to death because of an alleged plot. Her beautiful

sister Moralba avenged Floridea's misdeeds. Floridea had opened by 24 January 1688 (A, I-MOas
A). The title-page is dated 1688. The libretto carried a dedication date of 22 November 1687 (an earlier
premiere must have been anticipated), with an imprimatur on the final page of 18 November. A license
to print the libretto had been issued on 24 May 1678! In deference to the current offering at SS.
Giovanni e Paolo, Floridea's six singers (or muses) were said to be amazons in the art of music.>
An enthusiastic note to the reader in the libretto said, Don't close your ears to the melody which will
accompany the voices of the important people in this opera. You will see that they are stars of. ..sufficient
luminosity to introduce the splendid solos...which occur annually.??!
A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSAp 5; Bonlini 245; Groppo 248; Alm 340

 1688a Cantata for the Grand Prince of Tuscany. Cf. Suppl. 6.

 1688b La Fedelta sfortunata. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

3 Caffi, loc. cit., and Saunders, Repertoire, p. 453.
3 Pallade veneta, p. 204.

3 The Venetian singer Vittoria Tarquini became one of the most celebrated singers of her time. Prince Ferdinando de' Medici became enraptured
with her and eventually aroused the envy of his future wife, Violante Beatrice (the daughter of the dedicatee of this work, whom he was to
marry the following November). The prince's affair with Tarquini also alienated his favorite castrato, Francesco de Castris (also known as
Cecchino de' Massimi; see Kirkendale, Principiate, pp. 440-3). From 1699 Tarquini was in the employ of Gian Gastone de' Medici.

35 Principally Francesco Rossi and Lodovico Busca.
316 Pancieri was from Milan. The text may have contained contributions of Agostino Piovene.

3! Four operas were presented at the Teatro de' SS. Apostoli (in Ca' Bellegno) between 1649 and 1652. This is the only work to have been
staged there subsequently, apart from Oronte (Suppl. 5b), which may have been given nearby rather than in this theater.

318 A baron of the Holy Roman Empire. The Rezzonico family had been admitted to the Venetian nobility in 1684 (US-CAh MS Ital 112, f.
134v).

3 Groppo (p. 65) notes that an eight-page prologue was added to the work and that many revisions were made with the signature A. A work
with the same title, but apparently different authorship, had been given in Reggio in 1677.

3 As a coro di Sirene...mai pil comparse in scena (Pallade veneta, p. 203), they were also lacking in previous experience.

! There is no evidence of annual performances at the Teatro de' SS. Apostoli.

186

1688/7



1688/8

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Carlo il Grande Music by Domenico Gabrielli
[CHARLEMAGNE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and cori SORTING DATE: 1688-02-14

Dedicated to Ferdinando III de' Medici, Grand Prince of Tuscany

This account of courtly intrigue in the age of Charlemagne, derived from Ariosto's Orlando furioso
(1510), featured the paladins Roland/Orlando and Ronald/Rinaldo. The battle scenes emphasized the
defense of Paris [which the Moors never attacked] and the defeat of the Moors. Monsters issued from
an underground passageway in the first badlo.

Carlo il Grande was first performed between 17 and 21 February 1688 (A, M). Its run would have been
short, since Shrove Tuesday fell on March 2. The production was a stellar one, replete with six cori
and thirteen roles. Giacomo Filippo Cabella sang in the title role, with Nicola Tricarico (Orlando), an
unnamed Servite priest (Rinaldo), Alessandro Girardini (Ruggiero), Laura Spada (Bradamante), Angiola
Gringher (Alcina), Faustin Marchesi (Medoro), Vittoria Tarquini (La Bombace, Angelica), Tomaso
Boni (Breno), the Polish bass (Atlante), and other unidentified singers.

Each act included five distinct sets of scenery. One page of the libretto was devoted to listing the machines
and special actions in each act  seven (including demons, monsters, and a stag hunt) in the first, ten
(including a bed that turned into a dragon, a cloud that became a chariot, a review of the French army,
and winds that were transformed into spirits) in the second, and four in the third act. Tessin described
the work's scenery in glowing terms. He was impressed by one change [in Act Three] from a splendid
chamber into a frightening grotto because of the impressive difference between them. The thing
he found absolutely surprising and inconceivable was the lowering of an entirely new scene which
included a box filled with people and live horses.?? This would have been the amphitheater in which
Roger/Ruggiero and Ronald were to fight their duel at the end of the work.

Accounts of Orlando furioso had a long history rooted in the commedia. In earlier Venetian opera, Pietro
Paolo Bissari's Bradamante (SS. Giovanni e Paolo, 1650**) was the one setting of a related story. In
it the ghost of Merlin appeared in a prologue. Its production was replete with balli featuring baboons
pursued by hunters (who, after catching them, imitated their antics), the delivery of Alcina by a flying
dragon, and a plethora of phantoms.

Score in I-MOe; arias in GB-Ob; I-MOe

Listed as Galvani SGG 17; Bonlini 253; Groppo 256; Alm 349

La pena degli occhi Music by Francesco Rossi
[THE PUNISHMENT OF THE EYES]

A dramma per musica Librettist unknown
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1688-02-26~

Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua

32 See Caffi, loc. cit., and Saunders, Repertoire, p. 453.
333 Mancini, Teatri, i/1, 83.

> Attributions to Cavalli by early bibliographers are now considered dubious.

A

 1688c
1688/9

rT

1688/10

m1

&y
- OO

fi

 1688d

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 187

The story was an improbable one featuring the princes of Mycenae and Dania, the latter disguised as
ashepherd.* It was full of capricious incidents. The duke of Mantua arrived in Venice on 26 February
to enjoy Carnival (M), suggesting that this work was given during its last fortnight.

No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SMoi 31; Bonlini 252; Groppo 255; Alm 348

Le muse in maschera. Cf. Suppl. 6.

La fortuna tra le disgrazie' Music by Paolo Biego
[THE FORTUNE AMONG MISFORTUNES]

A dramma per musica Text by Rinaldo Cialli
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1688-12-26~

Dedicated to the Procuratessa Elena Pesaro Basadonna*

The revival of this popular work (1688/1) is likely to have opened just after Christmas 1688. Perhaps
to suit the available scenery, the setting has been changed to Sicily.

Arias in GB-Ob; I-MOe

Listed as Galvani SSal 47; Bonlini 259; Groppo 262; Alm 358

Il gran Tamerlano Music by Mare' Antonio Ziani
[TAMERLANE THE GREAT ]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1688-12-30

Dedicated to Ferdinando III de' Medici, Grand Prince of Tuscany'

Late in the fourteenth century, Tamerlane conquered much of the Ottoman Empire, took the Turkish
emir Bayezid prisoner, defeated the Golden Horde (of Mongols), and invaded Russia and India. The
subject was recast by Piovene (1711/4) and later reset as Bajazet (1742/6). In this account, non-historical
episodes were added. Zamerlano opened on 30 December 1688 (I-MOas A); its title-page is dated 1689.
The first ballo, for eight buffoons with Turkish instruments, suggests a janissary band. The cast, given
on the last page of the libretto, included Anna Maria Torri (Roselena), Elena Cavazzoni (Zelida),
Giuseppe Maria Segni (Finalino; Emireno), Pietro Paolo Scandalibeni (Baiazette), Giuseppe Scaccia
(Tamerlano), Lorenzo Sartini (Jalone), and Giovanni Rosetto (Ali).

Arias in F-Pn; I-MOe

Listed as Galvani SSGP 80; Bonlini 254; Groppo 257; Alm 352

Il Gioseffo. Cf. Suppl. 8.

>5 The charioteer Thrasymedes was one of the occupants of the Trojan Horse.

*6 Both the Pesaro and the Basadonna families were from Padua. The dedicatee's husband was a procurator (from 1682) and was sent as an
overseer to Navarino in 1688.

*7 He was soon to be wed to the princess of Bavaria, who was to arrive in Bologna by the 24th but was in Verona on the 25th (I-MOas A).

*8 Prince Gaston of Tuscany arrived in Venice for carnival on 16 December 1688 (M) and was received by the doge (Baschet, Histoire, p.
495). The Grand Prince may not have arrived until after 1 January 1689 (M).

188

1689/1

M

es
\)

1689/2

m1

OB

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Amulio e Numitore Music by Giuseppe Felice Tosi
[AMULIUS AND NUMITOR]

A dramma per musica Text by Adriano Morselli
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and cori SORTING DATE: 1689-01-11

Dedicated to Georg, Landgrave of Hesse*

In Roman mythology, Amulius, king of the Albans, was the grandfather of Romulus and Remus. Numitor
was his brother.** The relationship described here between the brothers was fictional; gods intervened
with poetic fables. Morselli wryly remarked that he had written not a tragedy but a drama for the
Venetian stage. Amulio opened on 11 January 1689 (I-MOas A), the first day of Carnival. The dedicatee
had arrived in Venice during the week ending 1 January 1689 (M). Francesco de Grandis sang in the
title role, with Anton Francesco Carli (Numitor), Anna Maria Lisa (Silvia), Angiola Gringher (Martia),
and Tomaso Boni (Liso). One of the seven cori was for sea monsters. Tosi's incomparable music

and the singular virtue of the singers were praised in the libretto.
Score in A-Wn**!; arias in -MOe
Listed as Galvani SGG 18; Bonlini 255; Groppo 258; Alm 353

La Rosaur: a Music by Giacomo Antonio Perti
[ROSAURA]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Arcoleo
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a prologue, introduzione, and balli SORTING DATE: 1689-01-13

Dedicated to Francesco II d'Este, Duke of Modena*

Rosaura, the widowed queen of Persia, was intent on resisting the advances of an army general in order
to marry his son-in-law, but the object of her desires proved to be her own brother in disguise. The author
apologized for the fact that he had to adapt his text to accommodate scenes already painted and
costumes already prepared.?*? The prologue was for Venus, Love, and Destiny, and one ballo was
for Truth and Trickery. La Rosaura opened on or shortly after 11 January 1689 (I-MOas A).>4
Scores in D-SWI; I-MOe;>* arias in D-SWI, D-Hs; F-Pn; I-MOe

Listed as Galvani SAng 24; Bonlini 257; Groppo 260; Alm 355, 356

 The first of a series of Hessian dedicatees of Venetian operas, Georg (1669-1705) was to become a Knight of the Golden Fleece in 1697.

In 1687 Hesse and Brandenburg supplied 4,000 troops to the Venetians.

3 The name Amulio was associated in Venice with the Da Mula family, who claimed descent from the same legendary Amulius. A Collegio
Amulio was established by Marc' Antonio Da Mula in Padua in the sixteenth century.

33! Giovanni Rossi also possessed a score (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).
332 The short-lived duke (1660-1694) was the brother-in-law of James I of England. His marriage to Margherita Farnese (d. 1718) was childless.

333 There were three versions of the libretto (Groppo MS, p. 118).

54 Francesco d'Este was present in Venice from shortly after 7 January until shortly before the 29th (M). He made a second visit to Venice
around 12 February (M).

35 Fasc. edn. in IOB, 67.

1689/3

1689/4

i

&
CO

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 189

II trionfo d'Amor e di Marte Music by Antonio Lombardini**
[THE TRIUMPH OF LOVE AND WAR]

A dramma per musica Text by Paolo Emilio Badi
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a giuoco and balli SORTING DATE: 1689-01-15

Dedicated to Adriana Tirabosco

The story was drawn from Persian history, with emphasis on Xerxes' siege of Thebes. Arsakes, the
king of Thebes, was to establish the Parthian dynasty in what is now Iran. In this work he fought to
regain his liberty from Xerxes' prison. The production of // trionfo was in progress on 15 January 1689
(I-MOas A). According to the report of Lorenzo Zanchi, San Moise had in // trionfo the most beautiful,
most pleasing, and best attended work of the season.** The balli, including one alla francese, were
changed every night.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SMoi 33; Bonlini 260; Groppo 263; Alm 359

Il Pertinace Music attributed to Paolo Biego
[PERTINAX]

A dramma per musica Librettist unknown***
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1689-01-29~

Dedicated to Friedrich Augustus, Prince of Saxony*?

The demise of the Roman Empire began with the fall of Pertinax [193 AD], a figure in Legrenzi's Publio
Elio Pertinace (1684/3). This account, predating those events, concentrates on Pertinax's predecessor
Lucius Commodus [180-192], who tried to engage the interest of Marcia by donning a lion-skin and
carrying a club, in imitation of Hercules. She often dressed as an Amazon. The dedicatee of this work,
which is not directly cited, arrived at his palace near San Felice on 15 January 1689 and remained there
until 21 February (M). He enjoyed both operas and feste di ballo during his visit (M). This may have
been the unnamed work cited in the memoirs of the lute virtuoso Pietro Bertacchini as one after which
he gave a notable private performance. Pertinace was produced in Parma in 1699.*4!

No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSal 46; Bonlini 256; Groppo 259; Alm 354

36 Unknown in Venetian circles, Antonio Lombardini was a priest in Pazzolo (Friuli).
337 |-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1582, letter of 16 Febbraro 1688 M.V., f. 2v.

358 The dedication was written by N. Nicolini.

* The young prince Friedrich August (b. 1669), was to succeed to the Saxon throne in 1694 and eventually become the king of Poland. It
was reported that the only [notable] foreigners in Venice during this season were the princes Altieri, Saxony, and Turenne (I-MAas, AG,
Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1582, letter from F. G. A. Treni of 19 Febraro 1689).

* Bertacchini, in his autobiography, recounts an important theatrical performance in Venice in 1689. See Mirko Caffagni, The Modena Tiorba
Continuo Manuscript, Journal of the Lute Society of America, 12 (1979), 25-42.

*! Under the direction of Cristoforo Frigieri, who was the impresario of Sant' Angelo in 1708-09.

190

1689/5

CO

 1689a

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Le gare dell'Inganno e dell' Amore Music by Teofilo Orgiani
[THE CONTEST BETWEEN DECEPTION AND LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Paolo Emilio Badi
Given at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1689-02-05~

Dedicated to Giovanni Battista Piatti

In this short work Solakes, a gentleman of Thebes, was to wed Corilda (see 1688/3), a lady of Thessaly.
Rosmene, the princess of Epiros, encountered Corilda disguised as Armindo, Rosmene's brother. This
provided the pretext for the gay scenes, happy accidents, and spirited canzonettes with which Badi
claimed to have constructed this operina in three nights. In the final scene, Deception and Love appeared
on a machine.

Le gare appears to have been given late in Carnival in 1689.>* It was the last work to be produced at
San Moise until 1692. The uncertain date seems to reflect a miserable reception in Venice. Badi wrote
that it fell to him to try to restore a theater which had been battered not because of disgrace but because
of ill-will. Orgiani was praised for his Roman mastery of the theatrical oddities expected in
Venice.*? The work was produced in Macerata in 1694.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SMoi 32; Bonlini 258; Groppo 261; Alm 357

L'Argene. Cf. Suppl. 7.

3 The dating of this work is problematical. Considered in isolation, it would seem a likely candidate to have opened in early January 1689,
but if it opened then it cannot have run for long. // trionfo d'Amor was in progress by the 1 Sth and it would probably have run for three weeks.
Since Carnival was over by 22 February, the available time slot could have consisted of the second and third weeks of February. Given that
the libretto was allegedly written in two days and set to music in three nights, a short run would have been in proportion to the effort expended.
It is conceivable that it was given only on the last nights of Carnival.

581 iterally le bizzarrie teatrali di Venezia.

The 1690s: An Overview

he ducal tenure of Francesco Morosini (1688-94)
LG coincided with a series of international confronta-
tions. His return to Venice in January 1690 was
greeted with victory celebrations, but the battle against the
Turks continued. Roused by a frenzy of ceremonies at home,
Morosini bravely set off again in May 1693. He died (of
illness, not injury) in Roumania the following winter. His
successor, Silvestro Valier (1694-1700), while bolstered by
the confidence that Morosini had earned, promoted ceremony
and ostentation at home. He reintroduced the custom
(abolished in 1645) of crowning the dogaressa (Suppl. 6).
He permitted Venetian noblewomen to wear their jewels and
finery in public, a previously prohibited custom. The height
of pomp was reached with the visit of Czar Peter the Great
in the autumn of 1698. The Peace of Carlowitz (Serbia),
officially ending the war initiated by the Holy League, was
concluded in January 1699. Austria retained Hungary,
Venice retained Dalmatia and the Peloponnese, and Poland
retained its border provinces.

The 1690s were in some ways less bold, in others more,
than the 1680s. The heady days of war planning passed.
Many of the military strategists who now assembled in
Venice were troop commanders or their surrogates, rather
than dukes and princes. The majority were from Germany
or the Empire. The execution of and recovery from war were
less exhilarating than anticipatory dreams of glory.

The most influential changes of the decade affecting
theaters concerned texts. First came the rise of a
dramaturgical reform movement (1695). There then arose
a divergence between its adherents (who represented anew
generation of noblemen) and the existing theatrical establish-
ment. The protagonists of change were the poets Apostolo
Zeno and Domenico David, as well as the architect Gerolamo
Frigimelica-Roberti. All of them were proponents of the
Arcadianism (emulation of bucolic innocence, praise of
nature) which emanated from the court of the exiled Swedish
queen, Christina, at Rome. Arcadia championed bucolic
settings and literary purity. For opera this meant the
suppression of comic scenes in tragic works, plus a return
to the Aristotelian unities (of time, place, and action) in
dramatic construction. Roles for nurses and servants

disappeared. Less celebrated is the search which the Arcad-
ians, particularly Zeno, made for new stimuli to the historical
imagination. Zeno himself acquired a growing library of
histories of parts of Europe  Spain, Scandinavia, and the
Slavic lands in Eastern Europe  which were remote from
Venice and its prior interests.

The Arcadian movement had an implicit allegiance to
the Holy Roman Empire. It flourished in the Grimani
theaters, particularly San Giovanni Grisostomo, which
enjoyed the patronage of an expanding circle of beneficiaries
of imperial power. Arcadian values were reinforced in the
academy run by Gio. Carlo Grimani at his palace on the
Campo Santa Maria Formosa (Suppl. 7). Arcadianism was
largely ignored in the other Venetian theaters, although
Sant' Angelo paid it lip service in later years. Arcadianism
had several flavors. Machines continued to impress by their
size and mechanical properties, particularly in works devised
by Frigimelica-Roberti, but bucolic settings were essential
to the elaborate intermedi of his works. Sets were more
carefully described than ever before, but prologues for the
gods were disappearing. Shepherds  by turns love-sick,
gay, or scheming  provided a backdrop for the discussion
of human foibles.

The most important new composer of the period was
Carlo Francesco Pollarolo, a commanding presence, an
unusually imaginative artist, and the preferred musical
interpreter of Arcadianism. Pollarolo brought with him from
Brescia an extensive knowledge of both voices and instru-
ments. He was an experimenter ready to try something new
in every work. He set the longest works ever produced in
Venice. They were based on the most elaborate of
Frigimelica-Roberti's tragedies, which ran to five acts.

While Pollarolo was rescuing San Giovanni Grisostomo
from obscurity, the dilettante violinist Tomaso Albinoni
brought new luster to San Cassiano, which had many ties
to Florentine theaters. Taste at San Salvatore was reoriented
through the theater's promotion of two young Venetian
composers, Marc' Antonio Ziani and Antonio Caldara. Both
developed ties to the Mantuan court and later went to Vienna,
where, serially, they dominated music at the Hapsburg court
for the first third of the eighteenth century. Mantua, for its

192

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

20

18
16-
14
12
10

Sant'Angelo ]
San Cassiano

@ San Gio. Grisostomo
SS. Gio. e Paolo

San Moise

@ San Salvatore
Other _

ON F&F DO

FIGURE 22. Productions by theater, 1680s vs. 1690s.

part, supplied many of the best voices heard in Venice in
the last two decades of the seventeenth century. Comparisons
of theatrical activity in the 1680s and 1690s are shown in
Figure 22.

The two theaters which presented the largest number
of works in the 1690s, San Salvatore and SS. Giovanni e
Paolo, were both destined to withdraw from opera production
at the end of the century. To avoid congestion after Christ-
mas, there was significant growth in the autumn season,
particularly in the St. Martin's period and especially when
an early Lent was imminent, but there was a corresponding
decline in winter operas, particularly in the St. Stephen's
period.

Almost as many operas (86) were produced in the 1690s
as in the preceding decade. The number of meta-operas-
declined in response to a reduction in state visits to Venice.
Only eighteen operas (20 per cent) from this decade are
survived by full scores. They exclusively represent the works
of Pollarolo, Giacomo Perti, and Giovanni Bononcini and
dedicatees of significance. Many works are survived by
miscellaneous arias. The news-sheets of choice are now the
Mercuri, the papal legate's records, and the Corriere
ordinario. Primary avvisi are in short supply. As the median
political rank of opera-goers slipped from its social peak in
the 1680s, digesters of weekly news-sheets began to ignore
works to which no important witness could be linked.

The 1690s: Chronology

1690/1 Brenno in Effeso Music by Giacomo Antonio Perti
[BRENNUS IN EPHESUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Arcoleo
M1 Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1690-01-04~
& Dedicated to Antonio Ottoboni, N.V.!
Oo Brennus, a Gallic general in the third century BC, had less to do with this plot than two baby girls whose

lines of descent were confounded by their having been traded at birth. The lengthy dedication and
description of the historical motive for the work given in the libretto express the authoritative status
of the dedicatee as a nephew of the sitting pope. Ottoboni was en route to Rome by 6 January 1690

' The nephew of the pope (Alexander VIII). He had been elected a procurator of San Marco in October 1689. The Ottobonis' strong
sympathies for the French (as opposed to the Austrians), which increased over time, influenced the nature of their musical patronage.

1690/2

V1

ae)

1690/3

i

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 193

(BG), suggesting that this run began before permission to wear masks was given on the 10th (M).
Appropriately, the authors of the text and music were both drawn from the Papal States. Three of the
singers  Francesco Ballarini (Brenno), Pietro Moggi (Romerico), and Elena Cavazzoni (Eusonia)
 were under the protection of the duke of Mantua.

Arias in F-Pn; I-Rvat

Listed as Galvani SSal 48; Bonlini 263; Groppo 266; Alm 362

Pirro e Demetrio Music by Giuseppe Felice Tosi
[PYRRHOS AND DEMETRIOS]

A dramma per musica Text by Adriano Morselli
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and a battle scene SORTING DATE: 1690-01-11~

Dedicated to Gasparo de Luca, N.V.

In the second century BC, Pyrrhos tried to liberate the state of Epiros from Macedonia, which was then
ruled by Demetrios. In this account the two rulers have become friends. Demetrios, who is in love with
the Ethiopian princess Klymene, encourages Pyrrhos to feign love for her in order to test her virtue.?
Morselli's dedication expressed the hope that the harmonious music of maestro Tosi and the sweet
song of the most famous singers of our century would compensate for the defects of the drama, which
he attributed to the short period of time available to write it.

Pirrois likely to have opened between 10 and 21 January 1690 and to have run until the end of Carnival
(7 February). On 11 February 1690 Gio. Carlo Grimani noted that Giovanni Buzzoleni [Demetrio] had
completed his appearance at San Giovanni with much applause and sought a contract for the following
year. Grimani was greatly impressed with the natural skill at ornamentation (maniere disinvolte) of
Dianina Testi [Climene] and also praised the singing of Anna Maria Beccarina.*

Both in casting and in its incidental entertainments, Pirro contained an odd mixture of allegorical,
mythological, historical, and modern-day figures. A ballo in Act One was for Persian and Ethiopian
children, while in Act Three a ballo in the form of a battle required four changes of scene and was to
be presented by cavallieri. To judge from the frontispiece of the libretto, the scenery may have
emphasized exotic dress and customs. Alessandro Scarlatti's setting of the same text was to open in
Naples on 28 January 1694. It attracted a great deal of interest when it was given in London in Owen
[Mac]Swiney's translation (1708). It was revived there in 1717.

Arias in I-MOe, Pac*

Listed as Galvani SGG 19; Bonlini 262; Groppo 265; Alm 361

L'amor di Curzio per la patria Music by Paris Alghisi
(THE LOVE OF CURTIUS FOR HIS FATHERLAND]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1690-01-15~

? The remaining singers (all identified in the libretto) were the Venetian Angelica Zannoni (Elvira), Francesco de Grandis (Endimiro), Carlice
Venturini (Camilla), Antonio Panconi (Leonzio), and Valentino Urbani (Dorillo). The last four were employed in Vienna, Parma, Florence,

and Udine.

3 Epiros corresponds to modern Albania. Klymene was sometimes a generic figure representing Asia.

4]-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1582/3, letter of 11 Febraro 1690. Other members of the cast cited in the libretto were Francesco
Antonio Pistocchi (Pirro), Faustina Perugini (Deidamia), Faustin Marchesi (Clearte), Ferdinando Chiaravalle (Mario), and Tomaso Bonis
(Brenno). No casting for Arbante, a male role, is given, nor is La Beccarina mentioned in the libretto. She may have joined or left the cast
in the middle of the production.

5 The score in I-Nc is Scarlatti's (1694).

 This was the first of two libretti by the Brescian priest Paris Alghisi (also Algisi). Both were produced at SS. Giovanni e Paolo.

194

1690/4

i

ia)

On

A

 1690a
1690/5

rT

fi

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Dedicated to Marc' Antonio Gambara'

The mythical Curtius, lured by the voice ofan oracle calling for one more noble citizen, made the ultimate
sacrifice for Rome by hurling himself into a pit of fire in the Roman Forum. L amor must have opened
in the middle of January 1690 and run until the end of Carnival. According to his dedication of the libretto,
Corradi counted it his good fortune to work with Alghisi. He also credited the scenery designer, Giuseppe
Sartini, and the costume designer, Gasparo Pellizzari, but not the singers.

Arias in I-Rvat

Listed as Galvani SSGP 81; Bonlini 264; Groppo 267; Alm 363

La Falsirena Music by Marc' Antonio Ziani
[FALSIRENA]

A dramma per musica Text by Rinaldo Cialli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1690-01-15~

Dedicated to Cesare Ignazio d'Este, Prince of Modena

In this story popularized by Marino, the mythical Adonis was captivated by Falsirena.* Like the three
preceding works, La Falsirena must have opened in mid-January 1690. A revised version was given
in the following year with the title Marte delusa (1691/2). Cialli's most successful text, Falsirena was
staged in numerous other locales over the coming decade.

Arias in D-MUs, GB-Lbl, Ob, Och; I-MOe, Rli, Rvat

Listed as Galvani SAng 25; Bonlini 265; Groppo 268; Alm 364

Gl'amori fortunati negli equivoci. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Il gran Macedone Music by Giuseppe Boniventi?
[THE GREAT MACEDONIAN]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giulio Pancieri
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli' SORTING DATE: 1690-12-14

Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua

The plot focused on the conflict between Phoenicia and Macedonia in the time of Alexander, the great
Macedonian. It was embroidered with amorous intrigues. The first opera to be given at San Cassiano
since 1683, the work was expected to open on 19 or 20 November 1690. Though later said to have opened
on the 25th with universal satisfaction (I-MOas A),'! this date cannot have been correct. The opening
was postponed numerous times on account of the failure of one of the singers, Valeria Guidicelli, to
reach Venice. Once there, she contracted laryngitis. According to the mortified impresario, Gio. Francesco
Palazzi, permission to open the production was granted for 8 December, but the actual premiere did
not take place until the 14th.'? On account of its late start, it resumed on 29 December (I-MOas A).
Arias in GB-Lbl; I-Rvat

Listed as Galvani SCas 26; Bonlini 267; Groppo 270; Alm 366

7 The count, who held the title of marquis of Spigno, was from Brescia. The Gambara family had recently been added to the Venetian nobility.

 The role of Falsirena may have been a model for that of Ersilla in Braccioli's Orlando finto pazzo (1714/4).

 Boniventi (c. 1670-c. 1727), a Venetian, was at the time this work was written maestro di cappella at the Mantuan court. From 1712 he served
Karl Wilhelm, the prince of Baden-Durlach. He moved in Vivaldi's orbit in c. 1718-22.

'0 Turkish instruments [cymbals?] were indicated in the dance of the Moors, but the music does not survive.

" Itwould have made sense to plan for an opening on the 25th, because the Maggior Consiglio reconvened on this date. The libretto was dedicated
(without a day given) in November 1690.

" |-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1582, letters of 12 (2) and 20 November as well as 2, 9, 16, and 24 December 1690. These letters
provide an intimate account of conditions at the time and are treated separately in E. Selfridge-Field, La guerra de' comici.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 195

1690/6 L'incoronazione di Serse Music by Giuseppe Felice Tosi
[THE CORONATION OF XERXES]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli
"1 Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1690-12-26
o Dedicated to Sophie Charlotte, Electress of Brandenburg"?

Xerxes, the king of Persia in the fifth century BC, assumed the throne after the defeat of his father,
Darius, by the Greeks at the battle of Marathon. In this account, Darius returns to Persia to challenge
plans for his succession. Morselli derived his text, he said, from the beautiful tragedy of Corneille.'*

OL L'incoronazione opened on 26 December 1690 (I-MOas A), the date of dedication of the libretto.'
According to a letter from Gio. Carlo Grimani of the previous year, Giovanni Buzzoleni agreed to a
payment of 100 doppie for his appearance and 16 doppie to cover travel expenses.' Grimani had also
planned to procure the services of Dianina Testi, Anna Maria Beccarina, and Domenico Cecchi (Il
Cortona).' However, Beccarina had already been engaged by Sant' Angelo and Cecchi was committed
to appearing in Rome during the coming Carnival.'* In their places Grimani sought to engage [Rosa]
Mignata and Ferdinando [Chiaravalle]. He was soon in conflict with the first over her demands for a
wardrobe and with the second for wanting a stipend for his free time.'? Neither appeared in the work.
The title-role was taken by Francesco Antonio Pistocchi, with Diana Testi as Stateira.

A Arias in D-MUs; I-Rvat
Listed as Galvani SGG 20; Bonlini 270; Groppo 273; Alm 370

1690/7 Il trionfo della continenza Music by Paris Alghisi
[THE TRIUMPH OF SELF-RESTRAINT]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi

M1 Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1690-12-26~

' The fifth child (1668-1705) and only legitimate daughter of Ernst August of Brunswick-Liineburg (soon to be elector of Hanover) and Sophie
of the Palatine (1630-1714). In 1684 she had become the second wife of Friedrich of Prussia (king from 1701) and gave birth in 1688 to the
future ruler Friedrich Wilhelm I (Frederick the Great). A great lover of music and accomplished harpsichordist, she was later influential in
promoting the role of music at the Prussian court (Feuerstein-Prasser, Kdniginnen, pp. 56-8, 69).

Cf. the libretto for La pace fra Tolomeo e Seleuco of the following month. Bonlini (Le glorie, pp. 115f) commented that Corneille had established
the new custom of begging subjects for dramatic works from foreign fantasies. He considered this a model which modern poets in Italy
would follow, even though for truly heroic plots they would do better to observe Italian models. His remarks read, A questo drama ha
comministrato l'idea M. Cornelio il Sofocle della Francia. Ne in avvenire sara pit: nuovo questo costume d'andar mendicando il soffetto alle
compositioni dramatiche da fantasia forastiera, poiche gia diversi de pit celebri autori francesi, Racine, Rotrou, Quinault, Pradon, de la Grange,
de la Motte, e l'accennato Cornelio, singolarissimi nel tragico, e nell'eroico, serviranno pit volte di guida, e' moderni poeti italiani ne' loro
drami pit elaborati, e saranno abbondantissime fonti, d'onde scaturiscano i pil! sublimi pensieri. Cosi che non dovra arrossire la nostra Italia,
d'aver avuto per maestra la Francia, quando alla medisima sia tenuta del maggior lustro de' suoi teatri, che il vero Araceae.

'S The title-page has a seasonal date of 1691 (at the top) and a printer's date of M.DC.XCI. (at the bottom).

6 ]-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1582, letter from Gio. Carlo Grimani dated 11 febraro 1690. Grimani later added a half dozen
doppie to Buzzoleni's regalo (op. cit., letter of 19 Aprile 1690).

'"l-MAas, AG, Busta 1582, letter of 4 Marzo 1690. Grimani's letter reveals that he was counting on Duke Ferdinand Carlo to provide employment
for Cecchi for the rest of the year and travel visas for him for the opera season.

'8 -MAas, AG, Busta 1582, letter to Grimani dated 8 Marzo 1690. The sender's signature is illegible. Cortona's agenda had been arranged
by Prince Antonio Ottoboni.

'9 T_MAas, AG, Busta 1582, letters of 29 Aprile and 6 Maggio from Gio. Carlo Grimani to [Count Carlo Maria] Vialardi. No singer with the
name Ferdinand took part in this production. Unless Signora Mignata was the unnamed sopran ferrarese, she did not participate either. See
Caffi, Appunti, and Saunders's listing of the cast (Repertoire, p. 454). From 1715 Rosa and Francesca Mignata (or Miniati), who were
Bolognese, sang at San Moise.

196

Op,

1690/8

i

ra)
OO #

1690/9

i

fs)
2 

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Dedicated to Torrismondo della Torre [Torriano], Baron of Taxis

In Greek history of the fourth century BC, a measured defense against the advances of Philip of
Macedonia was launched by the heroes of this work, led by Xenocrates. This seems likely to have been
one of the works which opened on 26 December 1690 (M), perhaps with a preview performance before
the 15th. The title-page is dated 1691; the season is identified as autumn.

Arias in I-MOe, Rvat

Listed as Galvani SSGP 82; Bonlini 268; Groppo 271; Alm 367

Creonte" Music by Marc' Antonio Ziani
[CREON]

A dramma per musica Text by Rinaldo Cialli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1691-12-27

Dedicated to Pietro Zeno, N.V.!

Creon, a mythical king of Egypt, was repeatedly unfaithful to his wife, Hypsipyle, the mythical queen
of Lemnos, and was eventually conquered by Cyrus. Creonte officially opened on 27 December 1690
(I-MOas A). The title-page is dated 1691; the season of performance is defined (wishfully, it appears)
as autumn. The cast must have included Anna Maria Beccarina. The libretto praised the music of Ziani,
which in the past year has been acclaimed marvelous and this year has merited the crown of Apollo
on account of its harmonious notes. It noted that the scenery designer Tomaso Bezzi was working
for San Giovanni Grisostomo as well as Sant' Angelo.

Arias in F-Pn; GB-Cfim; I-Rvat

Listed as Galvani SAng 26; Bonlini 269; Groppo 272; Alm 368, 369

L'inganno scoperto per vendetta" Music by Giacomo Antonio Perti
[THE DECEPTION DISCOVERED FOR REVENGE]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1690-12-28

Dedicated to Sebastiano Soranzo, N.V.?

The Scythian prince Sydernes, who was believed to be the son of the Persian ruler Cyrus, was engaged
to marry Mandane but fell in love with Stateira, the beloved of Darius. L 'inganno opened on 28 December
1690 (I-MOas A). It was given in Genoa in 1691. Perti is praised by Silvani in the libretto as one of
the most celebrated composers of Italy. While the actual casting is unknown, it appears that Maddalena
Musi had rejected an offer of 200 doppie from San Salvatore for the 1690-91 season in favor of one
from the Grimani to sing at San Giovanni Grisostomo.**

Score in I-MOe; arias in F-Pn, I-Rvat

Listed as Galvani SSal 49; Bonlini 272; Groppo 275; Alm 372

2 Baron Taxis (1628-99) was a councillor to the emperor. His family held a monopoly on the post and the distribution of news-sheets in imperial
realms. The subject was topical in 1690, because the Venetian government was attempting to prohibit the dissemination of political, military
and cultural news. [Della Torre is also sometimes given as Torriano.]

2! Pietro Zeno (Zen) was a nephew of the princes Ottoboni.

2 See the commentary for L incoronazione di Serse above.

3 Soranzo had been elected a procurator in November 1690.

4 She also requested 1,000 ducats from San Salvatore to settle previous accounts. Because she had received no reply, she was unable to give
Grimani an answer (I-MAas, AG, Bustal 176, Fasc. 1690, letter of 3 March 1690). Her request to the theater was repeated on 31 May, but
it appears that it was never answered, and the final outcome is unknown. More than four years later she wrote from Bologna that her many
obligations would prevent her from traveling to Venice at all (/oc. cit., letter of 14 September 1694).

1691/1

i

rs)
08 

1691/2

1691/3

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 197

L'Almerinda Music by Giuseppe Boniventi
[ALMERINDE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giulio Pancieri
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1691-01-20

Dedicated to Francesco Girolamo Gravena, Marquis of San Giorgio

Almerinde, the daughter of Albazar, king of Media, and wife of Belard, king of Persia, was the subject
of this fictionalized history. The title-page of the libretto is dated 1691; the dedication is dated 20 January
1690 [M.V.]. A note in the libretto says that the drama had been presented previously under a different
title and ina different format. The author maintained that the music of Boniventi and the performance
of virtuosi compensated for the dramaturgical defects of its present reduced form.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SCas 27; Bonlini 271; Groppo 274; Alm 371

Marte delusa Music by Marc' Antonio Ziani
[MARS DELUDED]

A dramma per musica Text by Rinaldo Cialli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1691-01-21~

Dedicated to Johann Albert of Freschen

This revival of Falsirena (1690/4) had newly added balli. Mars was scorned by Venus with the usual
disdain of the beautiful sex, and Adonis was encouraged. The work opened in Roman catacombs. Marte
delusa should have opened in the latter half of January, probably between the 1 6th and the 27th. Three
instrumentalists (Antonio Caldara and his father, Iseppo, plus Francesco Venago) filed a notarial
complaint against the impresario Francesco Quintavalle. They sought 130 ducats for the 1691-92 season
at Sant' Angelo. They claimed to have spent more than one month in rehearsals and to have given more
than thirty performances.* No works are named, but since the complaint refers to the season as such,
it is likely that the figures account for both Creonte (1690/8) and Marte.

Arias in GB-Lbl, Och (1690); I-MOe, Rvat

Listed as Galvani SAng 27; Bonlini 274; Groppo 277; Alm 374

L'amante eroe Music by Marc' Antonio Ziani
[THE HERO AS LOVER]

A dramma per musica Text by Domenico David
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1691-01-20~

Dedicated to Ranuccio II Farnese, Duke of Parma
During his attempted conquest of India, Alexander the Great competed with the territorial ruler
Taxiles/Tassilo -for the love of Berenice. In this account she was the wife of Poros, another Indian ruler,

?5 Probably a Maltese nobleman.

6 The reference cannot be decoded, however. No earlier (or later) Venetian opera included a role for Almerinda; the only reference given
in Allacci and Sartori under this title is to the present work.

27 Adjutant General to the margrave of Brandenburg.

28 Mangini et al., Teatri, i/2, 36.

 David (d. 1698), a Venetian medical doctor and poet, was allied with Apostolo Zeno in calling for dramatic reform.

> Having inherited his position as an adolescent in 1646, Ranuccio held his seat until his death in 1694. The title of the work (which could
also be translated as The Lover as Hero) and the subject in combination may have made a veiled allusion to the duke, although Arcadian purity
would presumably have frowned on such double entendres.

198 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

and both men were Alexander's military adversaries.*' The script contrasts Alexander's virtues with
Taxiles' vices, a moral juxtaposition characteristic of Arcadian reform, as both pursue Berenice. The
first ballo was one for eunuchs in Berenice's rooms.

O The dedicatee and his wife were expected to arrive in Venice during the first week of January 1691
(M), which suggests (in light of the run of L 'inganno scoperto; 1690/9) that this production would have
begun in the second half of the month or perhaps in early February. A lengthy introduction to the libretto
mentioned the addition of some inventions to adapt the text to the needs of tragedy. The librettist
lamented the small amount of stage time now permitted in Venice and said that because of the
excessive arias he could not extend the recitatives to convey faithfully his poetic meaning.

A Arias in D-MUs (Turin, 1695)

Listed as Galvani SSal 50; Bonlini 275; Groppo 278; Alm 375

1691/4 La pace fra Tolomeo e Seleuco' Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[THE TREATY BETWEEN PTOLEMY AND SELEUKOS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1691-01-23~
& Dedicated to Frederick, Duke of Slesweg-Holstein
 The Syrian king Seleukos [312-280 BC] murdered Berenice, the sister of the Egyptian king Ptolemy.

Peace was brought about by the Macedonian king Antiochos. La pace was mentioned as the forthcoming
second work at San Giovanni Grisostomo in a dispatch of 16 December 1690 (I-MOas A), by which
time its dedicatee had arrived in Venice. He remained until c. 23 February (A). The work should have
opened late in January, after the last performance of L 'incoronazione di Serse (1690/6). The title-page
is dated 1691.

 La pace was the first opera set by Pollarolo for San Giovanni Grisostomo. The librettist was dubious
about the reception, since instead of presenting the same scene which had been repeated hundreds
of times before on our stages, he had sought to create a new fantasy [based] on foreign poets. He
praised the marvelously adorned music of Pollarolo and the best swans of Italy [i.e., the singers].
Six singers, including Francesco Antonio Pistocchi (Antioco), were retained from Serse, but two 
Laura Spada (Seleuco) and Antonio Romolo Ferini (Arpago)**  were new. Spada's appearance
represents the earliest documented casting of a woman in a male role in Venetian opera.**

fi Arias in D-MUs; F-Pn; GB-Cfm; I-MOe*
Listed as Galvani SGG 21; Bonlini 276; Groppo 279'; Alm 376, 377

1691/5 L'Alboino in Italia Music attributed to Gius. Felice Tosi and C. F. Pollarolo
[ALBUIN IN ITALY]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi

im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1691-01-27~

3! Historically, after Alexander passed through the Gandharte region (west of Karachi in modern Pakistan), he encountered the forces of the
Raj Poros at the Jhelum River.

 In much of the Middle East eunuchs were the preferred attendants of women under royal protection.
> Born in 1671, he ascended to the throne of Denmark and Norway as Frederick IV in 1699.
4 Cf. Saunders, Repertoire, p. 454.

35 Williams Brown, On the Road, p. 22. Although her relationship to Paolo and Giacomo Spada (musicians active at the Pieta) is unknown,
the Pieta was also noted for cultivating the adaptation of female voices to male roles.

36 Dubowy, Arie und Konzert, p. 315, credits these arias to the performance given in Parma in 1691.
37 Printed as 179.

A

 1691a
 1691b
 1691

1691/6

mM

&y


1691/7

V1

&

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 199

Dedicated to Duke Camillo Gonzaga*

Albuin, who reigned in the later sixth century, was the king of the first Germanic tribe to invade
northeastern Italy. After crossing the Julian Alps, his forces overcame those of Byzantium in the northern
Adriatic. The nucleus of what was later to become the Venetian state was formed by those who took
refuge from his advances in the marshes near Grado. In this account Albuin's tyranny is treated almost
generically and is contrasted to the virtue of the Roman Empire.

The dedicatee appeared in Venice on 14 February 1691, which suggests an opening for Carnival proper.
The production could have begun from 27 January onward, though with only a month remaining until
the start of Lent, it is unlikely to have opened much later. Pollarolo had assumed the office of second
organist at San Marco the preceding August.

Arias in -MOe

Listed as Galvani SSGP 83; Bonlini 273; Groppo 276; Alm 373

Applausi festivi. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
Adone. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Glamori fortunati negli equivoci. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

L' Almira Music by Giuseppe Boniventi
[ALMIRA]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giulio Pancieri
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1691-11-22

Dedicated to Luigi d'Este, Prince of Modena

Almira, the young queen of Castile, was lost in a shipwreck. Her infant son, raised anonymously by
the fisherman who rescued him, was eventually recognized as the heir to the throne. The balli were
respectively for eight Moors and eight Spaniards. L Almira opened on 22 November 1691 (also the
date of dedication of the libretto) with much applause (NV). The elector of Bavaria [Maximilian II
Emanuel] attended a performance in early December. The title-page does not indicate a season. According

eo &,

to Pancieri's comment in the libretto, Boniventi's sweet notes made the story more palatable.

No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 84; Bonlini 278; Groppo 281; Alm 380

La Virtt trionfante Music by Marc' Antonio Ziani
dell'Amor e dell'Odio

[VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT OVER LOVE AND HATE]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani

Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)

Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1691-12-26

Dedicated to Maximilian II Emanuel, Duke of Bavaria!

38 Count of Novellara (near Reggio Emilia). He had been an important commander of land forces for the Venetians in the middle decades of

the century (Hanlon, Twilight, p. 151). The Gonzagas of Novellara, who had long minted the coins of the Gonzaga realm (1533-1678), maintained
a vigorous interest in antiquities and were instrumental in establishing a Jesuit convent (through a sixteenth-century marriage they were related

to Carlo Borromeo).

* A note by the librettist to his readers says that the work was composed in a few hours! The subject of A/boino depresso had been treated
anonymously in a production of Treviso in 1685 (Sartori 569).

The prince (1648-98), who was also the marquis of Scandiano, died without issue. The dedication was written by Francesco Soranzo, N.V.

+! Earlier the dedicate of // re infante (1683/1) and Orazio (1688/5), Maximilian I] Emanuel (1666-1726) was an ardent supporter of the
Hapsburgs, to whom he was related by his first marriage to Maria Antonia (d. 1692), the daughter of the emperor Leopold I. He was to be

200

CO ao

1691/8

} B

o

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

In this work the love of Artaxerxes, the son of the Persian king Darius, for Berenice, the daughter of
Mazeos, the king of the Scythians, triumphed over the enmity between their countries.

The reputation of La Virti substantially preceded its official premiere. It was in preparation by 2 October
1691, when G. Boughton wrote to Henry Grey, the duke of Kent, enclosing some arias of the new
first Oppera. He commented that Cortini and the Romanina sings at St. Lukes [San Salvatore]
which is thought will be the best Oppera.'* The story was little changed when the Corriere ordinario
reported on 22 December that the elector of Bavaria [Maximilian II Emanuel], Prince Eugene of Savoy,
and many others had greatly enjoyed the opera rehearsal at San Luca one week earlier. When the
work finally had its premiere, on 26 December, it was praised for the exquisiteness of the voices,
the magnificence of the scenery, and the richness of the costumes (CO). Another report (NV) found
the production to be most sumptuous. In introducing his libretto Silvani praised the music, the singing,
the architecture (i.e., the sets), and the painting (of the scenery). The text was later used by B. Micheli,
A. Vivaldi, and N. Romaldo in the like-named work (RV 740) given at the Capranica (Rome, 1724).
Arias in GB-Lam; I-Rvat

Listed as Galvani SSal 51; Bonlini 277; Groppo 280; Alm 378, 379

L'Ibraim Sultano* Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[IBRAHIM THE SULTAN]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli**
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1691-12-27

Dedicated to Johann Albrecht of Freschen**

Ibrahim, who feigned stupidity, was declared the emperor of the Turks. His brother, Bayezid, succeeded
to the throne.*' The subject is usually said to be derived from Racine's account, although recent
commentaries credit Georges de Scudery's Ibrahim, ou L 'Illustre Bassa (1643) as Morselli's main source.
The role of Akhmet /Acmat in Morselli's text provided the basis for Osmano in Goldoni's like-named
tragicomedia (1740; see Suppl. 3a), his last tragic work for San Samuele.

L'Ibraim opened on 27 December 1691 (CO). The elector of Bavaria [Maximilian II Emanuel] attended
arehearsal of this and other works in the days immediately preceding the Novena of Christmas (NV).
The work opened with a view of the serraglio ona canal that leads to the sea and ended with Bayezid's
coronation celebration. One ballo (Act I) featured eight Indians leading an elephant.** The production
was praised, together with that of La Virti trionfante (1691/7), for the exquisiteness of the voices,
the magnificence of the scenery, and the richness of the costumes (CO).

appointed governor of the Spanish Netherlands and a member of the Order of the Golden Fleece in the year of her death. In 1694 he married
the Polish princess Theresa Kunegunda Sobieska, who became an important, if invisible, patroness of Venetian instrumental music (to judge
from diplomatic dispatches in I-Rvat, AS, NV). He was to side with France in the War of the Spanish Succession. Losing with the French
side in the Battle of Blenheim (1704), he spent the last two decades of his life in exile in France.

* Perhaps Antonio Cottini.

* A nickname for several singers.

 Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 90.

45 Morselli, who admitted in the libretto to sweetening Racine's tragedy with amorous subplots, died before the work was performed.

46 An imperial count. Freschen is in the Vorarlberg (Austria) near Feldkirch.

' Turkish customs were prominent in the public mind in November 1691, when word reached Venice that three members of the sultan's harem
were pregnant simultaneously (I-Rvat A). Akhmet II (who ruled until 1695) had succeeded Suleyman III on 23 June 1691.

48 Substitute aria texts are appended to the avvertimento of the UCLA libretto, which contains the manuscript date 1692. In his article on
Morselli (GO), Saunders notes that the librettist heightened the comic element of the work by introducing two characters not found in Racine's

model.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 201

A Arias in F-Pn; GB-Lam; I-MOe, Rvat'
Listed as Galvani SGG 22; Bonlini 279; Groppo 282; Alm 382

1692/1 La Gelidaura Music by Francesco Quesnda
[GELIDAURA]
A dramma per musica Text by Giulio PancieriTM
M Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1692-01-12~
& Dedicated to Alvise Pisani, N.V.*
O@ Although the ostensible plot is one of conflict between Corinth and Crete, the fictional emphasis is

on the love affairs of Gelidaura and A linda with the rulers Coralbus and Hydraspes. Although in rehearsal

by 29 December 1691 (NV), the earliest libretto for La Gelidaura was dedicated on 12 January.

It appears to have been the four opera said on that date to be opening soon (M). After praising

Quesnda's most virtuous music and his melodious notes, as well as the prospect of a new voice

in the production, Pancieri observed that the composer arbitrated some of the text to suit the music.
A No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SSGP 85; Bonlini 281; Groppo 284; Alm 384

1692/2 Furio Camillo Music by Giacomo Antonio Perti
[Furius CAMILLUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
a Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1692-02-02
& Dedicated to Ferdinando III de' Medici, Grand Prince of Tuscany
Ke) The historical Marcus Furius Camillus re-established Rome after its invasion by the Gauls in the fourth

century BC. Here the emphasis was on the abduction of his daughter. Every aspect of the production,
which opened on 2 February 1692 (CO), was praised in the introduction to the libretto. Like Onorio
(1692/3), Furio Camillo was greeted with greater acclaim and was praised more for its magnificence
than any work of recent seasons.

A Score in D-Bds
Listed as Galvani SSal 52; Bonlini 280; Groppo 283; Alm 383

1692/3 Onorio in Roma Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[HONORIUS IN ROME]

A dramma in musica Text attributed to Giovanni Matteo Giannini

rT Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

With ballo SORTING DATE: 1692-02-03

* Giovanni Rossi possessed a copy of the score (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).
* Maestro of the Chapel Royal of Sicily.

5! Pancieri gives only an anagrammed name, Luigi Carenpi, perhaps because he had adapted the work for the Venetian stage from an author
now dead. However, the same constellation of roles is not apparent in any other opera given in Venice or nearby locales, so the work of
this unknown author may not have been set to music.

* Pisani was elected to the post of procurator around the start of the year but did not have his inauguration until 18 February. Like other
procurators, he paid 25,000 ducats for his seat (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VI-469, entry of 16 Febraro 1692).

3 US-LAu 384.
* Other copies are dated 2 February 1692.

55 In this case, it can only have been the fourth work produced by all the theaters collectively since the opening of the St. Luke's season, not
the fourth at SS. Giovanni e Paolo during the same period.

202 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

@o Dedicated to Pietro Ottoboni, N.V.
Honorius, a Roman emperor of the fourth century, held the Visigoths in check. In this account Lucillus,
the son of the Gothic king Alaric, sought the hand of Placilla, the emperor's sister.

@ The libretto for Onorio was dedicated on 2 February 1692, and the production opened on the 3rd. It
and Furio Camillo (1692/2) were said by the Corriere ordinario to have surpassed all previous works
given in Venice in applause and magnificence. The librettist reported that Pollarolo had composed
the music in little more than a week. According to the libretto, the ball of dame e cavallieri in Act 2,
Sc. 9, occurred in conjunction with an ensemble of many instruments of every kind illustrating Roman
life. On the 19th (Shrove Tuesday), Antonio Ottoboni, the princess of Fiano, and the prince of Denmark
were among those present at the end-of-season ball in the theater (M).

A Score in D-AN; arias in F-Pn; GB-Lam; I-MOe, Rvat
Listed as Galvani SGG 23; Bonlini 283; Groppo 286; Alm 386, 387

1692/4 L'oppresso sollevato Music by Giovanni Sebenico
[THE OPPRESSED RELIEVED]
A dramma per musica Librettist(s) unknown
i Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and a serenata SORTING DATE: 1692-2-04~
a Dedicated to Johann Georg IV, Duke of Brunswick
Soa

This renamed but unrevised revival of Leonida di Sparta (Turin, 1689) emphasized clemency. The text
was said to be based on Plutarch. The work left no imprint in existing documentation. It is likely to
have been provided to replace an unsuccessful work (Quesnda's La Gelidauria [1692/1] ), or perhaps
to have been given only for the last nights of Carnival (still two weeks away). The title page is dated
1692. The serenata at the end of Act Two included Sirens (Partenope, Ligia, and Leucasia) as well
as Nereids (glauchi) and Tritons. Arcadian reforms were not observed: the main text included a role
for a comic servant.

A No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SSGP 86; Bonlini 282; Groppo 285; Alm 385

 1692a Venere travestita. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

56 The plot seems especially suited to the dedicatee's situation, as he sought to take charge of his life in Rome without the assistance of his
uncle, the late pope Alexander VIII. However, Bartolomeo Groppi's dramma per musica called Alarico in Roma (Sartori 530) had been published
for performance in Padua in the winter of 1680 (M.V.? A printing license was granted on 16 February.)

57 A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1692, entry of 9 Febraro.
8 The wife of Prince Marco Ottoboni.
* A score was also owned by Giovanni Rossi (see I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

 After early appointments in Cividale del Friuli, Venice, and London the Croatian Sebenico (c. 1640-1705) was maestro di cappella at the
court of Savoy from 1663 to 1690. He was en route to Cividale, where he was named maestro di cappella before the end of 1692.

' The death of Johann Georg III (from plague in 1691) was unanticipated. His son, Johann Georg IV (here identified as Georg of Zell, Brunswick,
and Liineburg), hastened to marry his cousin, Magdalena Sibylla. Like his uncle, Maximilian Wilhelm (see Appendix 5a), Johann Georg IV
liked to train and launch his troops from Venice's Lido. His rule was short-lived, for he died in 1694. The Danish prince (later king) Frederick,
who attended the Shrove Tuesday ball at San Giovanni Grisostomo, may have been in his entourage on this occasion.

 Tt can at least be mentioned that a group of German generals and other officials arrived in Venice just before 17 Gennaro 1693 (M), but
they were initially held in quarantine at the Lazzaretto. This work is assumed to be unrelated to Minato's (1676/3).

 Two factors argue against its opening at the end of 1692 (which is not excluded by the date of the libretto). One is that it was not listed
among the works said by Johann Seyfried Eggenberg's diary to have been running in January 1693 (see the comments under 1692/10). The
other is Sebenico's appointment later in 1692 in Cividale.

1692/5

mM

ia)
Oe

1692/6

1692/7

&

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 203

La Rosalinda Music by Marc' Antonio Ziani
[ROSALIND]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio MarchiTM
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1692-11-15

Dedicated to Heinrich Karl, Baron of Sparre

Rosalind and Leald were shipwrecked off the Barbary Coast. Although rescued, she was subsequently
enslaved by a pirate who presented her to Akhmet, the king of Tunisia. Marchi noted in the libretto
that, knowing how hard it is in these times to please all humors, he was reluctant to see this work
submitted to censors and produced on the stage. Rosalinda was first performed on 15 November 1692
(CO, M), when it was found to be very pretty (molto vago). The libretto had been dedicated on the
11th. The text was reused in 1710/7.

Arias in I-Rvat

Listed as Galvani SAng 28; Bonlini 284; Groppo 288; Alm 389

Tole, regina di Napoli Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[IOLE, QUEEN OF NAPLES]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1692-11-18

Dedicated to Johann Adolf, Prince Palatine

After a flood of the Nile, Iole, the princess of Cairo, was married to the second emperor of Rome and
given the title of Queen of Naples. Jole was first performed on 18 November 1692 (M). Corradi wrote
that Pollarolo had surpassed the believable in composing the music and urged those attending to listen
to it. The work contained balli for buffoons and courtesans as well as a game with arms for soldiers.
The production was praised (CO) for its music and for the sumptuousness of its presentation (comparse).
No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SSGP 87; Bonlini 285; Groppo 289; Alm 390

La Fede creduta tradimento' Music attributed to Giovanni Frezza
[FIDELITY TAKEN FOR BETRAYAL]

A dramma per musica Text by Michel Angelo Gasparini
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1692-11-27

Dedicated to Gioan Redivo

This was the first of many libretti by Marchi, a Venetian.

 A brigadier and later a commander of the Venetian forces in Greece. Sparre may have been dead by the time this work was performed.

6 The score in I-Nc said to be of this work is not by Ziani (Dubowy,  I tronfi', p. 114). During Carnival of 1693 Johann Seyfried Eggenberg
bought a score of this work during his stay in Venice. He appears to have paid 32 Gilder and 33 Kreuzer for it, but this may have included
other items (Chvatila and Svestka, Eggenbergs, p. 42).

7 Also colonel of the imperial army. He served until 1697.

 In May 1692 Pollarolo had assumed to post of vice maestro di cappella at San Marco.

 Frezza was from Treviso, where this work was also given (in Roncade) during the autumn of 1692.

7 Gasparini, a soprano at San Marco from the late 1680s, was frequently cited by the procurators for unexcused absences. He was reinstated
in 1691, after which his service may have been more regular. His salary was raised to 100 ducats on 21 X.bre [ = Dicembre] 1708 (I-Vas,
PS, Busta 151, f. 46v).

7' A dottore, apparently of Portuguese origin.

204

1692/8

rd

rs)
oe

1692/9



A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

The story drew on the life of the Persian king Xerxes. It was of modest proportions, had only five roles,
and opened on a beach of the Hellespont. The only opera given at San Moise in the 1690s, La fede opened
on 27 November 1692 (CO). The title-page was dated 1693, and it was probably therefore intended
to run through Carnival.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SMoi 34; Bonlini 290; Groppo 294; Alm 399, 400

Il trionfo dell'innocenza" Music by Antonio Lotti
[THE TRIUMPH OF INNOCENCE]

A dramma per musica Text by Rinaldo Cialli
Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1692-12-26

Dedicated to Ferdinando della Torre [Torriano], Baron of Taxis

This treatment of the adultery of the emperor Zeno was pastoral. // trionfo opened on 26 December
1692 (CO). The dedicatee's presence in Venice and his attendance at various operas were noted during
the week ending 24 January 1693 (M). A delegation arrived from Rome during the week ending the
31st (M). Lotti's first opera (excluding Argene, Suppl. 7) followed his appointment as a second organist
at San Marco on 23 May 1692. The librettist observed that, although very young (giovanetto), the
composer had overcome the dissonances...disgraces, and disorders of contemporary poetry with his
harmony. In the undated revision (US-LAu 395) one of the balli demonstrated the sound of various
instruments.

Arias in I-CCc, Rvat

Listed as Galvani SAng 29; Bonlini 287; Groppo 291; Alm 394, 395

Nerone fatto Cesare Music by Giacomo Antonio PertiTM
[NERO MADE EMPEROR]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1692-12-27

Dedicated to Ferdinando della Torre [Torriano], Baron of Taxis*

Incontrast to Corradi's text of // Nerone (1678/8), this text gave equal attention to the emperor's second
wife, the lascivious Agrippina. The present work also contained a role for a Spanish ambassador, Guzman,
and, to further confuse its cultural message, a rigadoon.

Nerone had its first rehearsal in the Vendramin palace on the 15th (CO). It opened officially on 27
December 1692 (CO, NV). The run continued through at least 7 February 1693 (M). This and La forza
della virtit (1692/10) were received with great applause for the sumptuous scenes and musicians (M).
Noris cited the participation of the most celebrated singers of our century and said that Perti's music

 Only the production at Roncade (near Treviso), which occurred during the autumn of 1692 (Groppo MS, f. 127; Bonlini, p. 121), is cited
in NGDMM/2. It was dedicated to the brothers Francesco and Giovanni Battista Merati.

* Lotti (1666-1740) was to be a giant of Venetian music from the 1690s through the 1730s. He was a singer (contralto, from 30 May 1689),
organist (second organist from 1692, first organist from 1704 to 1736), and maestro di cappella (1736-1740) at San Marco. He was widely
known as a composer of operas and other dramatic works. He was a prolific composer of sacred vocal music, much of which survives in Germany,
where he was in residence of three years (1717-19). Benedetto Marcello (1716) condemned the naive dissonance treatment in Lotti's Madrigali
(1705), which were dedicated to the emperor, Joseph I.

TM The opening sinfonia was by Giuseppe Torelli.

75 The baron of Taxis was probably present for the premiere, since he concluded a stay in Venice on 25 January 16[93] (I-Rvat, AS, NV, N.
56, entry of the same date).

76 An excerpt from the rigadoon (a stylized Scottish dance) and what was effectively a minuet are shown in Alm, Winged Feet, p. 262.

1692/10

i

OR

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 205

was of the finest gold. The Corriere ordinario praised the quality of the voices. New arias were
added to both Nerone and La forza della virtu and both remained in production until the end of Carnival.
Scores in B-Br; CZ-Pr; D-SWI; I-Rsc (inc.)

Listed as Galvani SSal 53; Bonlini 288; Groppo 292; Alm 396, 397

La forza della Virti" Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[THE POWER OF VIRTUE]

A dramma per musica Text by Domenico David
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1692-12-29

Dedicated to Giovanni Carlo Grimani, N.V.

The historical Roderic/Rodrigo, last king of the Visigoths, was celebrated in Spanish history for his
personal virtue. In this account, Clotilda, the wife of Fernando, the first king of Castile, was even more
virtuous. It was she who befriended the ambitious Anagilda, her husband's mistress, and thereby disarmed
her, enabling marital virtue to prevail. The story was set in Seville.

La forza, having been delayed by the indisposition of one of its singers, opened with pomp and
magnificence not seen for a long time on 29 December 1692 (CO). It had been in rehearsal since before
the 15th. On 3 January it was said to be enjoying great applause (M).8 On the 23rd it was still enjoying
great attendance. The production continued through 7 February (M), the last Saturday of Carnival.
David noted that he had attempted to move the affetti in the breasts of the hearers with such efficacy
that they will delight those who are not emotionally stupid or spiritually obtuse in [comprehending]
the sentiments of the passions. Some of the most striking expression in the work comes from Pollarolo's
imaginative music. Anagilda's unaccompanied vanity aria, in which she sings of her allure, is an
apt example. Her role was taken by Domenica Pini, with Vittoria Tarquini (Clotilda), Antonio Romolo
Ferini (Rodrigo), Giovanni Buzzoleni (Fernando), and Pietro Moggi (Sancio).* Il Corriere ordinario
reported that the opening performance was characterized by more pomp and magnificence than Venetian
opera [had] provided for a long time.*!

The tale of Rodrigo and Anagilda had a long tenure on the Venetian stage. Pollarolo had composed
the music for a text (attributed to G. B. Bottalino) called L'Anagilda over Il Rodrigo, which was
performed in Reggio Emilia in the spring of 1685 (possibly also in Treviso in 1687); it featured Barbara
Riccioni (Anagilde), with B. Donatelli (Rodrigo) and C. Frangiossi (Sancio). David's text was set,
possibly by G. A. Perti, for performance in Florence (1702). It was adapted by Heidegger as a pastiche
for performance in London (Clotilda; 1709), and it was indirectly a model for Handel's Flavio (HWV
16; London, 1723).* Later treatments of the story included those of Paisiello (// gran Cid, 1775) and
Massenet (1885) and continued into the early twentieth century.

 David credits the fifth volume of Rogatis's Storie di Spagna (1648) for the particulars. He is more forthright than most librettists in hinting
at allegorical relationships between modern affairs and those of the times recounted. Pierre Corneille's Le Cid (1637) had treated similar material
but from a different perspective. The subject of Roderic was also a popular one for comedies in Spanish-speaking lands. The performance
ofa new comedy on this subject was noted in Naples, for example, in December 1702 (see Griffin, Gazzetta, Doc. 148, entry of 26 December).
The treatment here is very much in line with Arcadian reform.

78 Effectively before December 31, since all theaters were closed on that and the two following evenings.

TM Queste d'or crespe lucenti (These beautiful golden curls).

8 Saunders, Repertoire, p.455. The travel diary of Johann Sey fried Eggenberg named, in addition to the singers cited above, Vincenzo Dati,
Pietro Moggi, and Tomaso Boni (Chvatilova and Svestka, Eggenbergs, p. 41). The performances he attended postdated 12 January 1693.
During his stay (which lasted until 17 February) he also attended performances of 1692/7, 1692/8, 1692/9, and 1693/1.

8! A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1693, entry of 3 Gennaro.
 The Weavers (Florentine Theater, p. 192) speculate that Perti may have set the version given in Bologna in 1694.
53 Saunders (NGDMM/2, I, 1086) claims that the text influenced Metastasio's first libretto, Siface (set by Francesco Feo, Naples, 1723).

206

1693/1

i

sO

Fr)

 1693a
 1693b
 1693
 16934
 1693e

1693/2

im

fs)


A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Scores in B-Br; CS-KTM; arias in US-IDt
Listed as Galvani SGG 24; Bonlini 286; Groppo 290; Alm 391, 392, 393

Gli avvenimenti d'Erminia Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo*
e di Clorinda

(THE ADVENTURES OF ERMINIA AND CLORINDA]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi

Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1693-01-07

Dedicated to Antonio Widman

Corradi's note to the courteous reader suggests that he was looking for the kind of success he had
enjoyed with La Gierusalemme liberata (1686/11). Accordingly, he had returned to Tasso and the First
Crusade. The setting was again Jerusalem, where, as the work opened, a man-to-man battle took place
to the sound of trumpets. The bodies of Christian soldiers lay on one side of the stage, those of Saracen
soldiers on the other. Gli avvenimenti opened on 7 January 1693 (CO).

No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 88; Bonlini 289; Groppo 293; Alm 398

Gl'impegni della Gloria. Cf. Suppl. 6.

Patriotic works given by the Accademia degl' Animosi. Cf. Suppl. 7.
Serenata at the chapter house of San Marco. Cf. Suppl. 8.

Serenata on the Piazza San Marco. Cf. Suppl. 6.

Commedia given after an accademia. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Amage, regina de' sarmati' Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[AMAGE, QUEEN OF THE SAUROMATES]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1693-11-10

Dedicated to Lunardo Delfin and Marina Barbarigo, NN.VV.*

The Sauromates were a tribe of Iranian nomads in which women and men played relatively equal roles
as warriors. In the second and third centuries (the period of time suggested by this text) they came into
conflict with roaming German tribes in central Asia. Amage, having for a husband the decadent Ulderic,
was forced to administer justice and to instruct the troops herself. The first ballo depicted a baccanale,
suggesting the lasciviousness of works commissioned for newlyweds.** Despite the title-page date of
1694, this work opened on 9 (CO), 10 (NV), or 11 (I-Rvat A) November 1693, when it met with

* Giovanni Rossi also possessed a copy of the score (I-Vnm, Cod. It. VII-1613).

85 Corradi noted that this was the fifth stage work which Pollarolo had set within a period of three months. Two of the other works by Pollarolo
were Jole (1692/5; 18 November) and La forza della virtit (1692/10; 29 December). If the claim is accurate, the other two would have been
outside Venice or not given in public.

86 A papal notary, also the count of Ortemburg. Other visitors of this time were Johann Seyfried von Eggenberg and the prince of Holstein.

87 Husband and wife.

88 Although, as here, such allusions were often masked as representations of the licentiousness of Asian culture.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 207

universal satisfaction (NV). Its production was suspended on 28 November for Advent but resumed
on 12 January 1694." Amage was given in Bayreuth in 1699.

A Arias in I-PAc, Rvat
Listed as Galvani SAng 30; Bonlini 291; Groppo 295; Alm 401

1694/1 La moglie nemica Music attributed to Marc' Antonio Ziani
[THE INIMICAL WIFE]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1694-01-11
& Dedicated to Francesco Maria Spinola
Oo The argomento relates that the emperor Otto posed as his own ambassador at the court of the Byzantine

tyrant Nikephoros [Phokas]. The historical context is murky; see Boccardi's elaboration, Amore e Sdegno
(1726/4). Although La moglie was first officially performed on 11 January 1694, Cardinal Ottoboni
had attended a rehearsal prior to his departure on the 4th (M), and earlier ones had taken place in
December (CO). Foreign singers destined to appear in this work and in Ottone (below) had been in
town since mid-December (CO). The libretto was dedicated on 10 January.

A Arias in I-PAc, Rvat
Listed as Galvani SSal 54; Bonlini 293; Groppo 297; Alm 403

1694/2 Ottone Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[OTTO]
A tragedia per musica (5) Text by Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti
ry Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With intramezzi containing balli SORTING DATE: 1694-01-14
& Dedicated to Ernst August, Duke of BrunswickTM

When Mary of Aragon, the wife of the Emperor Otto III [996-1002], was attracted to a young count,
her jealous husband had him decapitated. The count's wife now sought revenge. In this version of the
story, the count was a son of Otto but was believed to be the son of Lucretia, a widow with whom Otto
had fallen in love. In a typically high-flown introduction, Frigimelica-Roberti stated that tragedy is
a mysterious panegyric of public liberty...the most noble delight that one can provide for universal
recreation on the stage. He allowed, however, that Venetian taste might be different from that of Greece,
Rome, or Paris.

* A-Wn, CO; also I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 56, entry of 14 Novembre 1693, f. lv, and N. 57, entry of 16 January 1694, f. Ir.
 Stieger, Opernlexikon, iv, 72.
*! Duke of Sabbionetta and a Spanish Grandee. The Spinola family served the Spanish throne in Genoa.

 CO; I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 57, entry of 16 Gennaro 1694, f. Ir. No works were performed between 26 December 1693 and 9 January
1694 because of a jubilee (/oc. cit.).

 Count Frigimelica-Roberti, from Padua, was principally an architect and structural engineer. The libretti he created for the Venetian stage
over the next years marked the apex of grandiose staging, investing in their exemplars of classical dramaturgy opportunities to maximize
dramatic effects through elaborate presentations. Frigimelica-Roberti was also an ardent patron of anti-Turkish espionage networks.

* In 1692 the emperor created the special title of Elector of Brunswick-Liineburg for Ernst August. The plot can be read as a gloss on the
elector's personal affairs (see also 1696/7). In the winter of 1693-94 the elector was amalgamating military forces in Venice. The count of
Oxestam (a German) and Count Bielch (a Swede) were among those who had arrived in the autumn (I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 57, entries
of 31 Ottobre, 5 Dicembre 1693). His own retinue included various members of his family, some of whom began to leave Venice at the end
of January 1694 (Joc. cit., entry of 30 Gennaro 1694), Others remained through May.

S The time frame was described by the librettist as the days of Pietro Orseolo, the celebrated doge [991-1008] who first started to expand
the Republic of Venice down the eastern shores of the Adriatic [999].

208 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

OOn Ottone opened on 14 January 1694 (M, CO), the date of dedication of the libretto. Francesco Ballarini,
who had not sung at San Giovanni Grisostomo for ten years, took the title role. The production was
noted for its most superb machines (CO). A revised version with anonymous music was given with
the title / prodigi dell 'innocenza (Florence, 1707). The original version was revived in Venice as 1716/5.

o-39 The staging, which was conceived on a grand scale, became a model for later settings of Frigimelica-
Roberti's texts. Each act featured one elaborate intramezzo. The depictions represented Love, Innocence,
Virtue, the Underworld, and Chaos. The scenery for them collectively hinted at a contest between Virtue
and Vice. The infernal scene in Act Four was full of furies, shadows, and spirits. In the intramezzo
called a spettacolo (Act Five) the stage was divided between an amphitheater full of people and Chaos,
which was being put in order.

A Scores in CS-K; D-B; I-PAc, Rvat; US-SFu
Listed as Galvani SGG 25; Bonlini 292; Groppo 296; Alm 402

 1694a L'invidia in maschera. Cf. Suppl. 7.
1694/3 Alfonso primo Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[ALFONSO I]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
im Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1694-01-24
[cal Dedicated to Juan Antonio Moles?'TM

In this story derived from medieval Spanish history, the Visigoth Alfonso, who served as the first king
of Asturias [739-757], had a sister (Gelinda) who fell in love with and seduced a married vassal.'"!

 2  Alfonso opened on 24 January 1694.' The curtain was opened at the start of the work by the Winds
to reveal a woods of great oak trees. Scene Two was introduced by a sinfonia of harps, violins, and
theorboes, which accompanied the dance of amorini in a misty salon of Alfonso's palace called the
Heaven of Venus. Behind this scene a third curtain was raised to show a sea on which boats could be
seen in the distance. These opening scenes were supposed to symbolize thoughts of love, amorous sin,
and royal treachery respectively. A series of other palace rooms with celestial themes followed in order:
the Heaven of Mars (showing a comet), of Lucina (showing a full moon), of Jupiter (showing his star''),
and of the Sun, and of Mercury. The production was very well received, ostensibly for its beautiful
scenery, machines, and general appearance.!TM Atypically, there were two balli in each act.

 According to the Mercure of the 16th, only San Salvatore and San Giovanni Grisostomo were then open. The Vatican avviso for the same
date indicates, however, that Sant' Angelo had also re-opened and that comedies were in production, from the 11th, at San Cassiano, San Samuele,
and Cannaregio.

 A complete cast list is given in Saunders, Repertoire, p. 455.
8 R. L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 210.
 The librettist noted that this was a tragedy with a happy ending.

 According to the libretto, the dedicatee (identified only as Giovanni Antonio) was a councillor to the emperor, an aulica in Bohemia, and
acount of Nostis and Arienck (neither of which is traceable; Nostis could be a misreading of Tarsis). His Christian names in reverse order
are those of the Spanish special envoy, Juan Antonio Moles, who had his first audience with the doge on the same day this work had its premiere
(I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Avvisi, N. 57, entry of 30 Gennaro 1694, f. 1v). Given the Spanish subject matter, it seems likely that the envoy and the
dedicatee were one and the same. Further on Moles, cf. 1696/4.

'! The story is based on Rogatis. Noris points out that he has changed the name of the sister from Semena to Gelinda in order to accommodate
it to the music. On a more abstract level, the story is not without its relevance to contemporary relations between Spain and France, since
one role is taken by the Gallic king Theodoric [ = Theodoric IV, 722-737].

' The work given in Naples as Alfonso VI, re di Castiglia on 6 November 1694 (Griffin Doc. 66) should have been different, since the
Castilian monarch ruled from 1072 to 1086, but CO gives the title here as Alfonso primo re di Castiglia. Although Handel's opera Sosarme,
re di Media (HWV 30, 1732) was originally entitled Alfonso primo, no relationship between its text and that of this work has been established.

3 A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1694, entry of 6 Febraro (the opening is reported retrospectively with no precise date).

1694/4

V1

A

 1694b
 1694c

1694/5

im

[a
QO

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 209

Score in US-SFu; arias in D-SHs;'TM I-PAc, Rvat
Listed as Galvani SSal 55; Bonlini 296; Groppo 300; Alm 407

L'Amore, figlio del Merito Music attributed to Marc' Antonio Ziani
[LOVE, THE SON OF MERIT]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1694-02-06~

Dedicated to Friedrich August, Duke of Saxony!

Prince Lydios, the son of Midas, the mythical king of Phrygia, loved Sulpicia, the daughter of the nature-
spirit Silenus. Some elements of the work (the presence of the princess Theodelinda, the ballo for gypsies)
were external to the mythological context.

L'amore opened during the week ending 13 February 1694, which was shortly before the departure
of its dedicate.' It was doubly ill-fated in that word of the death of Doge Morosini in Roumania was
received in Venice on the 13th. Although the theaters were permitted to remain open, masking was
suspended. All festivities on the piazza were closed, and plans for a festive Giovedi Grasso, which fell
on the 18th, were rescinded. Morosini's funeral occurred on the 21st, and his successor, Silvestro Valier,
was elected the following day. Festivities on Valier's behalf took place on the 25th, 26th, and 27th.'
Arias in I-PAc, Rvat

Listed as Galvani SAng 31; Bonlini 294; Groppo 298; Alm 404, 405

Capricci (?) for the exaltation of Doge Silvestro Valier. Cf. Suppl. 6.

Il sogno di Venere. Cf. Suppl. 6.

Zenobia, regina de' palmireni Music by Tomaso Albinoni"
[ZENOBIA, QUEEN OF THE PALMYRANS]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Marchi
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1694-11-13

Dedicated to Francesco Serra, Marquis of Genoa!

The city of Palmyra, which stood at the intersection of roads leading to Syria and Babylonia, was ruled
in the third century first by Zenobia's husband, Septimius Odaenathus, and, after his murder, by her
[269-272]. Zenobia was first performed on 13 November 1694 (M). The production continued after
Christmas. The production of Albinoni's first opera, which contained fifteen scene changes, was
considered good enough (assai bene) and was well attended (M). Marchi, who hoped for the same
success as he had enjoyed with Rosalinda, praised the virtuous and delightful music of Sig. Tomaso
Albinoni, who...has reached the level of the leading professors.

'4 From Act Two, Scenes 6 and 7, according to Strohm, Opernarien, ii, 199.

'S Friedrich August (1670-1733) married Eberhardine of Brandenburg-Bayreuth in January 1693. He unexpectedly succeeded his elder
brother Johann Georg IV as Elector of Saxony in April 1694. In 1696, shortly after the death of Jan III Sobieski, Friedrich August was
converted to Catholicism, paving the way to his appointment as king of Poland the following year. He was later known as August the Strong.

'06 See I-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 57, entries of 30 Gennaro and 13 Febraro 1694. A prencipe di Sassonia fratello dell'ellettore was in
Venice prior to 30 January (I-MAas, AG, Carteggio, Busta 1583, letter from Lorenzo Zanchi dated 30 Gennaro 1693 M.V.). Op. cit., f. 30v
[for 30 Gennaro (16)94] says that he was suddenly recalled from his travels, so he may have missed seeing this work performed in public.

'07 -Rvat, AS, NV, N. 142, ff. 78-94, entries of 13, 20, and 27 febraro [16]94.

08 A Ibinoni (1670-1750/1)earned substantial sums as a maker of playing cards. A gifted violinist, he spent the bulk of his career in Venice
but formed a close connection with the Florentine court over the next decade and later worked in provincial venues and while conthinuing
to base his life in Venice.

' A field marshal from Milan.

210

1694/6

Op

1694/7



A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Score in US-Wlc;'" arias in A-Wn
Listed as Galvani SSGP 89; Bonlini 295; Groppo 299; Alm 406

La schiaviti fortunata Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[FORTUNATE SERVITUDE]

A dramma per musica Text by Fulgenzio Gualazzi'"
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1694-11-15

Dedicated to Louis Thomas Amede de Savoia, Duke of Carignano'!

The libretto was based on the chivalrous tale of Friedrich/Frederic/Federico, the Staufen king of Sicily
[1198-1250],''? who fell in love with the slave Ginevra. She was rescued by her original lover, Amerigo,
who was disguised as a gardener. The action took place in Palmyra. La schiaviti was first performed
on 15 November 1694 (M). Like Zenobia (1694/5), it was considered good enough and was attended
by a great concourse of people (M). However, the theaters were ordered closed on the 28th for Advent.
Arias in ]-MOe

Listed as Galvani SAng 32; Bonlini 297; Groppo 301; Alm 408, 409

Irene' Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[IRENE]

A tragedia per musica (5) Text by Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti''*
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With intramezzi in the form of giuochi and balli SORTING DATE: 1694-12-26

Dedicated to (Cardinal) Pietro Ottoboni, N.V.

The Eastern ruler Mehmet, depicted in this libretto as a man with a curious mix of vices and virtues,
was learned in languages, sciences, and letters. He first noticed Irene,''' the niece of Constantine, when
she was a slave and he was about to undertake a campaign in Hungary. The work opened in the imperial
palace in Constantinople and closes on a field in Hungary.''

Frigimelica-Roberti intended the libretto to be a sequel to his Ottone (1694/2). Ina lengthy note to the
readers he offered a short treatise on dramaturgical aesthetics. Poetry, he said, is the most delicate of
the arts because it is judged both by fantasy and by intellect. Those who do not like verisimilitude must
not like the truth to which it is akin. Human actions are the truths that poetry imitates. Art exposes
perfect ideas as models. In the present case he seeks to write a work which will please an audience in
Venice. The work is very simple, for Irene's tragedy is starker than that of Otho. One will find less
action, fewer characters, and more concentration on passion. However, a happy ending is maintained.
Irene opened on 26 December 1694 (M). Diamante Maria Scarabelli, a later favorite of this theater,
made her debut as Irene's sister Deianeira. Antonia Marzari sang in the title role."' The first of the
four intramezzi featured court mutes and story-telling Turks, while the second was for Moorish and
Turkish eunuchs with tambourines and Turkish-style instruments. ... Moors were featured in the third

0 Facs. edn., IOB, 15.

"' Gualazzi was a Domenican priest from Verona.

"2 Also count of Soissons, a Bourbon principality in Picardy.

"3 Though also a Holy Roman Emperor [1215-1250], he spent most of his life outside Germany.

"4 Trene had been the subject of a tragedy by Valerio Martinazzo in 1615 (cf. Riccoboni, Histoire, p. 120).

"5 She was later to become the empress who ruled at the time of Charlemagne's coronation as Holy Roman Emperor [800 AD].

"6 Unrelated to the credibility of Frigilemica-Roberti's dramaturgical justification, this subject gave the theater an opportunity to recognize
the victory over the Turks which had been achieved in November 1694. Since such victories were presented to the public as victories of Christianity
over heathenism, Ottoboni was a particularly appropriate dedicatee.

' Fora full cast list see Saunders, Repertoire, p. 456.

1694/8

1695/1

OB

1695/2

"8 Facs. edn., DMV,

"' Mostly commonly

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 21

intramezzo and janissaries accompanied by trumpets and timpani in the fourth. It was reported that the
production featured the most exquisite voices in Italy (M) and was produced admirably (CO).
Score in CS-K;"* arias in F-Pn; I-Nc, Rvat

Listed as Galvani SGG 26; Bonlini 298; Groppo 302; Alm 410

Laodicea e Berenice' Music by Giacomo Antonio Perti
[LAODIKEIA AND BERENICE]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1694-12-26

Dedicated to Tarquinia Colonna Ottoboni'

Laodikeia and Berenice were the successive wives of the Syrian ruler Antiochos II in the third century
BC; he divorced the first to marry the second. Perhaps responding to Frigimelica-Roberti's declaration
of purpose, Noris noted in his preface his long experience with works for this stage, his modesty, the
purity of his expression, the necessity of each role he created, and his avoidance of superfluity. The
work was first performed on 26 (M) or 27 (CO) December 1694. It was revised around 22 January 1695
(CO). The libretto assured readers that the most exquisite voices of Italy were employed in it and
in Irene (1694/7). The singers are not identified. Scarlatti's setting of the text was performed in Naples
in April 1701. The work influenced L 'inganno trionfante in amore (1725/6; 1735/6).

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SSal 56; Bonlini 299; Groppo 303; Alm 411, 412

Il prencipe selvaggio Music attributed to Michel Angelo Gasparini
[THE SAVAGE PRINCE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani'
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1695-01-12

Dedicated to Felipe Antonio Spinola Colonna, Duke of Sesto!

In this quasi-satire on recent successes at other theaters, Enrique, the king of Aragon, left two babies
 Alfonso and Irene  to be raised by their uncle Fernando. Alfonso disappeared, Fernando became
atyrant, and Irene escaped to Castile. Meanwhile the Castilian princess Eleonora had to choose as her
future husband either Prince Rodolfo of Portugal or Prince Luis of Castile. Their true heritages were
discovered through their opposition to one another.' /] prencipe opened on 12 January 1695 (CO);
its libretto had been dedicated on the 10th, and Carnival had opened on the 11th.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SAng 33; Bonlini 300; Groppo 304; Alm 413

Il pastore d'Anfriso Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[THE SHEPHERD OF AMPHRYSE]
A tragedia pastorale per musica (5) Text by Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti

v.

referred to in Venetian records as the princess of Fiano. In the libretto she was labeled the duchess of Bassanello and

the princess of Caronano.

'2 In the dedication of the libretto of L 'innocenza giustificata, Silvani lamented the absence of his name on the libretto of I! prencipe selvaggio.
He says it was omitted for reasons of jealousy.

"2! The marquis of Los Balbases was born in Madrid and held an Iberian title. He descended from a prominent Genovese family.

'2 Silvani, declaring his only intention to be that of pleasing his patron, termed the work a scherzo poetico. The historical point of departure
is c. 1100 but the elaboration is quite free.

212 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

rT Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With intramezzi SORTING DATE: 1695-01-22
& Dedicated to Karl Philipp, Margrave of Brandenburg'?

This works gives an elaborate account of the conversion of the nymph Daphne (Antonia Marzari), who
resisted the advances of Apollo (Valentino Urbani), into a laurel tree.'4 She was thereby concealed
from her pursuer. Ina further installment of the discourse on drama which was serialized in the prefaces
to his libretti, Frigimelica-Roberti defended his combination of pastoral subject matter with the tragic
genre. He cited Aristotle and Homer for examples in defense of the character of his new work,'* but
the story's essential elements link it to a long tradition of Italian poetry, notably through Petrarch's
Laura and the many crowns of laurel that pervade it.

Oo The secondo drama...at which one sees a great concourse was first performed on 22 January 1695,
when it was found to be very good (M). A week later universal applause was reported (CO). The
dedicatee had arrived in Venice before the first of the year and left during the week ending 12 February
(M). He was esteemed for having donated a substantial sum to the allied cause in 1694.'" I! pastore
had reprises in Brunswick (1697) and Wolfenbiittel (c. 1703) as well as Venice (1704/4).

 The staging involved six machines, seven choruses, and twenty-four allegorical parts  including Time,
the Century, the Year, the Month, the Day, the Twelve Diurnal Hours, the Four Seasons, Dawn, Dusk,
and Daylight  perhaps in anticipation of the end of the century. Many of these appeared only in the
elaborate intramezzi, which concluded each act. The opening of the work showed what must have been
a spectacular forest scene, with Daphne's father, the lucid River Peneos, singing to her. In the first
intramezzo nymphs played instruments, sang, and danced in praise of the huntress Diana. Satyrs and
hunters did the same in the second. Zephyrs came with Dawn in the third; nymphs and shepherds frolicked
in the fourth. Dreams and phantoms arrived with Night as Apollo departed at the end of the work.

&S The descent of Apollo's palace at the start of the last act was the subject of an often-quoted account
by Luigi Riccoboni. The palace was ...formed entirely of chrystals of different colours, which turned
about perpetually...while lights showed through them into the eyes of the audience.' This spectacle
gave the work a legendary status that is still echoed in many studies.

A Score in CS-K; arias in F-Pn; I-Rvat
Listed as Galvani SGG 27; Bonlini 302; Groppo 306; Alm 415, 416

1695/3 Il prodigio dell'innocenza Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[THE PRODIGY OF INNOCENCE]
A dramma per musica Text by Fulgenzio Gualazzi
im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1695-01-24
& Dedicated to Tomaso Granelli, Noble of Genoa!

The libretto treated Roman history of the first century and included a prologue for a vestal goddess
and Innocence. The work opened on the Roman new year, | March. Pompilius, the superintendent of
the vestal virgins, was confronted with various issues related to their well-being.

"3 The brother of the elector of Brandenburg had gained prestige in Venice during the previous winter (coincident with the death of Doge
Morosini) by sending a substantial contribution to the war effort (I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 142, f. 89v, entry of 27 febraro [16]94).

'4 Tt was anticipated by CO (A-Wn, Vol. 1695, entry of 8 Gennaro) as la favola di Apollo con Dafne, tutta pastorale, che per la bizarrie
introdottevi,...riuscira di applauso universale.

'25 He does not mention Ovid nor does he indicate Jean Auvrey's poetic account of L' Amour du pasteur d'Amphrise in Le Banquet des
Muses (1623) or la Fontaine's five-act Daphne (1684) as possible sources of inspiration.

"26 T_Rvat, AS, NV, N. 142, f. 89v, entry of 27 Febbraro [16]94.
"7 Riccoboni, Reflexions, p. 35.

'28 A Iso a baron of the Holy Roman Empire, he may have traveled in the company of the new Spanish ambassador, Juan Antonio Moles, who
had previously been ambassador to Genoa and had arrived in Venice early in October (CO).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 213

 The production of // prodigio opened on 24 January 1695 (CO, M).
A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 90; Bonlini 301; Groppo 305; Alm 414
 1695a Serenata for the duchess of Fiano. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
1695/4 La costanza vince il destino Music by Pietro Romolo Pignatta!
[CONSTANCE CONQUERS DESTINY]
A dramma musicale Text by Pietro Romolo Pignatta
1 Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1695-10-15
& Dedicated to Countess Platen of Hanover'*

OO Almira, the widowed queen of Memphis, was pursued by the disguised Arbantes, the king of Troy and
also her husband's murderer, but Adrastos, the king of Libya, and Klearchos, the king of Ethiopia, also
sought her hand.'?! The libretto was dedicated on 15 October 1695 and performance soon thereafter
is likely. There were many special entertainments given between 22 and 31 October, when Baron Martini
passed through Venice en route to take up the post of imperial ambassador to Rome (Suppl. 5a). The
first ballo featured courtesans of various nations. The second portrayed four ghosts who arose from
a grave in conflict with four monsters who sprang from the body ofa dragon. The work was also presented
as L'Oronta d'Egitto (Vicenza, 1697/8).' Almira was also the subject of Ruggiero Fedeli's work
(Brunswick, 1703), which is thought to have influenced the text of F. C. Feustking for Handel's Der
in Krohnen erlangte Gliicks-Wechsel, oder Almira (HWV 1), given at the Gansemarkt, Hamburg, in
January 1705.'

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 91; Bonlini 303; Groppo 307; Alm 417, 418

 1695b Amore cangiato. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
1695/5 GP inganni felici Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[THE Happy DECEPTIONS]
A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno'TM
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1695-11-26~
az Dedicated to Francesco Girolamo Gravena, Marquis of San Giorgio
Oo The beautiful princess Agariste was so heavily protected by her jealous and superstitious father that

she was virtually imprisoned. Two princes, Demetrios of Athens and Orgontes of Thrace, disguised
themselves as a painter (Armidoro) and a musician (Sifalce) in order to enter the palace. Another princess,
Oronta, betrayed by the first, won the confidence of Agariste's father by disguising herself as an

'?? Pignatta was a Roman abbot. In the early 1680s he had been maestro di cappella at Sant' Apollinare. By 1688 he was in the service of
Johann Seyfried, the duke of Cromau (Cesky-Krumlov), for whom this work was originally written.

0 Ernst August's mistress, Klara Elisabeth von Meysenburg. The duchess of Hanover, who was the new mother-in-law of Rinaldo d'Este,
the duke of Modena, was also expected in a few weeks. When she finally arrived in early February, she had an entourage of 240 persons (CO).

'5! This account of the subject was far less frivolous than that of Pancieri and Boniventi (SS. Giovanni e Paolo, 1691/7).

2 With the subtitle La costante incostante (and with most roles under different names) it had been given at the palace of Johann Siegfried
in 1688. A near replication of the Venetian version, with the original title, was given in Udine in 1705. A pastoral on the subject of Almira
was also set by Graupner as Bestdndigkeit besiegt den Betrug (Darmstadt, 1719; Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 280).

'33 Ruggiero Fedeli, the son of Carlo, served the court at Kassel from 1695 to 1701.

'54 At the time this work was written, Zeno was a young Venetian nobleman already noted for his involvement with the Arcadian colony and
his promotion of textual purity. He was to create many opera libretti before becoming court poet and historiographer to the Emperor Charles
VI more than twenty years later. The re-election of Alesssandro Zeno by the Venetian Senate on 19 November as ambassador to Rome (CO)
may have provided a motivation for the emphasis on Arcadian values.

214 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

astrologer. This work, set on Zeno's first libretto, is likely to have opened on the last Saturday of
November 1695. The Corriere ordinario reports that its production resumed on 4 January 1696,'*
possibly after only a single performance in November, for the theaters were ordered closed during all
of Advent. Some libretto prints were dedicated on 25 November 1696 [sic], while others are undated;
the title-page is dated 1696.'

Oov Groppo attached a quotation from the later anonymous Considerazioni sopra il Demofonte dell Abb.
Metastasio (1735, Suppl. 3b) concerning Zeno's contribution to the reform of opera libretti. It states
that the dramatist was certainly the first to raise our theater to nobility. To start with, he rid it of the
ridiculous and ended the abuse of buffoonery, which had been introduced in the dramas of previous
years. A fter that, he selected subjects to represent which were drawn from the most illustrious and most
famous works of Greek and Roman antiquity. Finally, he brought order and decorum to dramas which
had become corrupted in our theaters.'* The reform movement was apparently not welcomed so
enthusiastically elsewhere. Alessandro Scarlatti's setting of the same text (under the title Agarista)
was given in Naples, with added comic scenes, on 6 November 1699 and was repeated in Florence in
1705. A setting by Buini was given in Venice (1722/7) and Florence (also 1722).

fi Scores in GB-Lbl;'** US-Wlc; arias in I-Rvat
Listed as Galvani SAng 34; Bonlini 305; Groppo 309; Alm 421

1696/1 Basilio, re d'Oriente Music by Francesco Navarra!
[BASIL, KING OF THE ORIENT]
A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Battista Neri!
im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1696-01-04
& Dedicated to Rinaldo I d'Este, Duke of Modena'!
O The Eastern Emperor Basil I [867-86], under whom imperial rule was both codified and centralized

in basilicas, was haunted in this account by the ghost of Constantine. Magic played a substantial role
in the narrative. A play-within-a-play represented the myth of Hercules and Iole.'*? Basilio opened on
4 January (CO, M); the libretto had been dedicated on 31 December. Basilio was the first opera to be
given at San Cassiano since 1691. By 28 January it was said to be drawing little concourse (M).'*

A Arias in I-Rvat
Listed as Galvani SCas 28; Bonlini 307; Groppo 311; Alm 423

'35 A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1695, entry of 3 Decembre; Vol. 1696, entry of 7 January: Sulle scene e ritornata |' opera nel Teatro di S. Angelo intitolata
Glinfanni felici.

'36 In all probability, the ban on Advent performances was anticipated when the dedication was signed. Salvioli, Bonlini, and Groppo list this
work as having been performed in (the autumn of) 1695, and in the bound UCLA copy, where there is no dedication date, it is grouped with
1695 works.

'57 Groppo, MS, p. 130: ...ft certamente il primo a nobilitare il nostro teatro. Egli primieramente levo il ridicolo, e scioccd abuso della persona
del buffone, che si vede introdotto ne' drami degli anni passati; indi scielse azioni da rappresentare che sono le pit illustri, e le pit famose
dell'antica storia greca, e romana; e finalmente diede ordine, e disposizione a' drami per quanto pud sofrire l'uso corrotto de' nostri teatri.

'38 Facs. edn., IOB, 16.
39 Navarra was a Roman who was currently serving as maestro di cappella to the duke of Mantua. This was his only opera.
'# Neri was from Bologna. This was his first libretto for Venice.

'4| The duke's bride, Carlotta Felicita of Brunswick, the princess of Brunswick and niece of Ernst August, made a progress from her home
to Modena via Verona and Mantua. Major entertainments were given in her honor around the end of January (M, MV). She arrived in Modena
early in February (M); the wedding ceremony was on the 6th. Rinaldo (1655-1737) had succeeded to the throne following the death of his
father in September 1694 but was to lose it in 1698, when the duchy was effectively dissolved. Carlotta remained there until 1720.

2 Tn the myth Iole resisted the amorous advances of Hercules.

3 |-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1583, entry by date. In the libretto Neri lamented the inviolable command of brevity.

1696/2

mM

&
O@R

1696/3

MM

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 215

La finta pazzia d' Ulisse Music attributed to Marc' Antonio Ziani
[THE FEIGNED MADNESS OF ULYSSES]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1696-01-07

Dedicated to Dorothea, Duchess of Parma!

Ulysses, the king of Ithaca, was considered mad for not wanting to wage war against the Trojans. His
madness turned out to be feigned.'*' La finta pazzia opened on 7 or 8 January 1696 (CO). It appears
to be the work whose production was disrupted when the singer Domenico Cecchi (Il Cortona),
temporarily demented by a fever, staggered across the stage before the start of the work. The theater
owners dismissed the audience but let them retain their tickets for a later performance.'*

Arias in J-Rvat

Listed as Galvani SSal 57; Bonlini 306; Groppo 310; Alm 422

Rosimonda Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[ROSAMOND]

A tragedia per musica Text by Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With cori SORTING DATE: 1696-01-09

Dedicated to Alessandro Molin, N.V.'*

The Lombard invader Albuin, after killing his rival Cunimond, had compelled the latter's daughter
Rosamond to marry him. The chalice he had fashioned from the skull of her late father was regularly
used ceremonially to symbolize his power. Albuin gradually established his rule across Lombardy [568-
573].'8 Rosamond conspired with one of the newly conquered princes to murder her husband; then
she married the murderer. The Lombards refused to accept their new king, which caused Rosamond
to abscond with their treasures and settle in Ravenna. Both husband and wife were murdered there.
The work opened in Pavia, where a royal banquet was in progress. The banquet hall became a funeral
parlor after Albuin is murdered.

In contrast to his other recent tragedies, Frigimelica-Roberti here intended a tragedy with an unhappy
outcome, he wrote. He strove to offer frequent incidents of a sentimental nature, the expression of
vehement passions, and robust elocution. In his introduction to the libretto he commented at length
on the expression of the passions and the debts of the dramatic concept to Aristotle. Wrath was the
dominating passion in this work, he said, and he wondered, therefore, whether it could please an audience
in Venice. He speculated that if it were well performed it should be well received, because the taste
there was no less delicate, no less pure than that of [ancient] Athens.

Rosimonda opened on or about 9 January 1696 (CO). The theaters had been closed for all of Advent
in 1695 (CO). There were few entertainments between Christmas and this time because of the death
of the imperial ambassador, Count [della Torre] (CO), in mid-December and the illness of the doge
in early January.

4 Dorothea Sophia, the princess of Neuburg and the daughter of the Elector Palatine, was to be married to her brother-in-law, Francesco [Famese]
I, Duke of Parma, on 9 July 1696. The marriage had been arranged the preceding November through the intervention of the marquis Pagano
(I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 143, f. 499v). Thus, if the year is correct, she was a future (rather than a current) duchess.

'45 Noris claimed to have written in a new style, neither ancient nor modern, in creating a story of jealousy with fine intrigues and a narrative
designed to pique the curiosity of the audience.

46 T-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1583/2, letter of Angelo Robetani dated 28 Gennaro [16]95 [M.V.].

47 Alessandro Molin was named General of the Morea in 1695 (M). He was dispatched on a mission in late August and could have commissioned
this text (or have been solicited for a dedication) prior to his departure.

'88 Alboin's Lombardy included many locales (Treviso, Vicenza, Verona) which were currently part of the Venetian Republic.

216 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

OR Rosimonda, which included individual roles for eighteen characters (several of them mythical or pastoral)
and nine cori, garnered universal applause. It appears to have been the work cited by the Mantuan
agent Angelo Robetani in letters of 31 December 1695 and 28 January 1695 M.V. In the first he
commented on the impression that Signora [Maria] Landini, a novice who took the title role, made in
rehearsal. In the second, he said that [Francesco] Ballarini had been unable to sing for several days
on account of a cold, but that Signora Landini produced miracles on stage with her spirited manner.
Pietro Paolo Scandalibene (A/buino) had not sung at San Giovanni Grisostomo for more than ten years.'

A Score in CS-K; arias in I-Rvat (autunno)
Listed as Galvani SGG 28; Bonlini 304; Groppo 308; Alm 419, 420

1696/4 Sigismondo primo al diadema Music by Pietro Romolo Pignatta
[THE CORONATION OF SIGISMUND I]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Grimani'*!
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1696-01-11
& Dedicated to Juan [Antonio] Moles, Baron of Tarsis'*?

Sigismund, the king of Hungary [1410-1437] who staunchly resisted Ottoman advances, died without
male heirs. The Houses of Austria and Hungary were subsequently combined. This plot recounted events
of 1435, when Sigismund went to Rome to be crowned emperor. In an irrelevant subplot, his minister
fell in love with a married noblewoman from Siena.'*

O@E Sigismondo opened on 11 January 1696 (CO). During the week ending the 21st the dedicatee was said
to be planning a lavish public entry (as imperial ambassador) for the last days of Carnival, but the event
did not occur until 29 April.'** By the end of the month, Sigismondo was attracting only a small
audience.'* In 1701 Gabriele Marcello wrote to the duke of Mantua stating that debts for which Moles
was responsible  because he had made [Sigismondo] be recited  were still unpaid. He expressed

the hope that a settlement could be negotiated with the singer Angela Preziosi.'%

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 92; Bonlini 308; Groppo 312; Alm 424

"9 1_MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1583/2, letters of Angelo Robetani dated 31 Xbre [Dicembre] /695 and 28 Gennaro 1695 [M.V.].
Robetani's earlier mention must refer to a rehearsal.

'S0 For a full cast list, see Saunders, Repertoire, p. 456.

'S' Galvani, Bonlini, and Groppo all attribute the work to Giovanni Grimani, N.V. Alm equates this with Giovanni Carlo Grimani, but
Gio. Carlo is not known to have written any other dramatic works. Vincenzo Grimani would have had a stronger orientation towards the subject.
The work could easily be by another member of the Grimani family or one which merely passed through their hands.

'S The dedicatee, the son of a previous Spanish ambassador, had been named the Spanish ambassador to Venice in October 1695 but did not
make his public entry until 29 April 1696 (cf. I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 58, entry of 28 Aprile [1696], f. 1v). He had come to Venice incognito for
Carnival 1693 (CO, 24 Gennaro). His own son, Diego, was staying in the palace of the papal legate in Venice later in 1696 (I-Vas, IS, RC,
Busta 615, report of 20 Novembre 1696). The holding of Tarsis was a legendary place, near the Straits of Gibraltar, to which ancient Tyrians
and Hebrews were said to have sailed. The British were to take control of the Straits in 1704.

'S3 Marchese Sigismondo was coincidentally an alias of Rinaldo d'Este (see Angelo Namias, Storia di Modena e dei paesi circostanti dall origine
sino al 1860, Modena, 1894, p. 413). The underlying preoccupation with rights of succession in the work could easily have been a gloss on
current concerns for the Spanish throne.

'54 Tt is logically possible that Sigismondo was given only during the last few days of Carnival, i.e., after Asmiro, although the character of
the work is not typical of those given (more commonly in later years) at the end of the season.

'5S |.MAas, AG, Busta 1583/2, letter of Angelo Robetani dated 28 Gennaro 1695 [M.V.].

'86 |.MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1584, letter of 16 Aprile 1701. According to Marcello, someone named Bortolo Morich had
unjustly gone to debtor's prison on account of these obligations, which amounted to millions of scudi. Preziosi had persuaded Abbot Guidizzini,
who had arranged for her performance, to award her three soldi and some costumes as a sign of good faith. Then Giovanni Contarini, the maestro
di camera of Cardinal [Vincenzo] Grimani, assumed the role of mediator to obtain the balance of her pay. However, the person in possession
of her contract, believed to be in Venice, could not be identified by Marcello, who therefore sought help in querying the virtuosa. See also
Marcello's letter of 14 Maggio 1701 (loc. cit.).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 217

1696/5 Il Domizio Music by Marc' Antonio Ziani
[DomitTius]
A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1696-02-06
@ Dedicated to Georg Friedrich, Margrave of Brandenburg!
Ooo This account of the reign of Domitius Domitianus, who served as a governor of Egypt in the late third

century, concentrated on the enmity between his consuls Marcus Lepidus and Flavius Flaccus. The
balli were (idiosyncratically) for Moorish, Persian, and Turkish children respectively. // Domizio was
first performed on 6 February 1696 (CO). Many German nobles had arrived in Venice for the funeral
of the imperial ambassador on 20 January. The prince of Ansbach (of the House of Brandenburg) had
arrived by the 28th (M). The Mantuan agent Angelo Robetani described the work in progress on that
date as a good operetta."**
A Arias in F-Pn; I-Rvat
Listed as Galvani SAng 35; Bonlini 309; Groppo 313; Alm 425

1696/6 Eraclea Music attributed to Bernardo Sabadini!
(HERACLEA]
A tragicomedia per musica (5) Text by Giulio Cesare Godi
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With cori and ballo SORTING DATE: 1696-02-08
& Dedicated to Ferdinando III de' Medici, Grand Prince of Tuscany

Hieron/Arrenione, the king of Sicily, was the uncle of the cruel Girolamo and the father of a married
daughter, Heraclea/Eraclea. Her husband, on a mission to Egypt, decided not to return to his homeland,
leaving Sicily prey to the rule of Carthage. In a series of invented incidents, virtue prevailed and, as
the title of a later opera maintained, treachery tricked itself.

ics) Eraclea had its first performance on 8 February 1696 (CO). The Grand Prince had arrived ten days
earlier with a following of more than 40 persons. Separate libretti had been dedicated on 5 and 6 February
1696.' Carnival had opened on the 4th, and he was said to be enjoying it greatly during the following
week (M). He was feted by the Venetian government on the 6th. Gifts in his honor (wild beasts, fish,
wine, candies and confections, crystal) were so numerous that four boats were required to convey them.'*!

 Godi explains that he had assumed the mask of the poet and opted to write a tragedy only in order
to obey the command of a great person, presumably the Grand Prince to whom he was dedicating the
work and whose sojourn in Venice was also noted. Godi says he spent three months writing the text,
making Eraclea a notable exception to the numerous libretti which were written in haste.' This was
the first of only two five-act works produced at San Salvatore (the second was Zeno's Tirsi, 1696/10).

'' Friedrich III (shortly to be Friedrich I of Prussia) inherited from his father Friedrich Wilhelm (the Great; 1640-88) the mantle of leadership
of German Protestantism. He supported William of Orange in his efforts to recapture the English throne (1688) and opposed Louis XIV. He
was imprisoned in 1697, but in 1701 the emperor, eager for his military support, granted him the title of King of Prussia.

158 1_MAas, AG, Busta 1583.

' Sabadini, maestro di cappella to the duke of Parma, set a like-named libretto by Stampiglia for Naples in 1700; it included some numbers
by Alessandro Scarlatti and scenery by Ferdinando Galli-Bibiena. See Griffin Docs. 114 (entry of 2 February 1700) and 116 (24 February
1700).

6 By two accounts (M, NV) the Grand Prince had arrived in Venice on 30 January; by another (Baschet, Histoire, p. 495) he had been received
by the doge on the 27th. US-LAu 428 was dedicated on 5 February.

6! -Rvat, AS, NV, N. 144, f. 77v, entry of XI Febraro 1696.

' The similarly titled work given in Florence in February 1705 is thought to have been a prose comedy based on Corneille's play (see R.
L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 201).


218

1696/7

ty

Op,

1696/8

im

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Arias in I-Rvat
Listed as Galvani SSal 58; Bonlini 312; Groppo 316; Alm 428

Ercole in Cielo Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[HERCULES IN HEAVEN]

A tragedia per musica (5) Text by Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With cori SORTING DATE: 1696-02-11

Dedicated to Georg Friedrich, Margrave of Brandenburg

After completing his Labors, Hercules married the beautiful Deianeira/Dejanira, who accidentally
poisoned him. This account moves from Hercules' bravery in rescuing Deianeira from the Centaur and
other heroic deeds to the misunderstanding which led to his death. Ercole included five elaborately
choreographed cori. Ercole opened on 11 February 1696 (CO). Members of the House of Brandenburg
had arrived in Venice during the week ending 28 January 1696 and remained into Lent, leaving during
the week ending 17 March (M). The Corriere's short summary of the work said that it opened in Hell
and ended in Heaven.

Continuing his discourse on modes of tragedy from earlier libretti, Frigimelica-Roberti traces the four
modes defined by Aristotle. Of those with tragic endings, his recently well-received Rosimonda (1696/3)
illustrated the situation in which the culminating horrible event was intended. In this work, in contrast,
the culminating horrible event was accidental. He notes that he has followed the models of Sophocles
and Seneca in order to introduce a different kind of pleasure appropriate to the second part of Carnival.
These accommodations lean towards the model of Sophocles and include combining the vague with
the well-defined, acchieving a certain style and color in the poetry, and encouraging the use of
scenery which was similarly varied in its hues and designs. He says that although this explanation of
his goals in attempting to create a new species of tragedy for the musical stage might be insufficient
in other places, for the audience in Venice it provides an adequate rationale. In its grandeur and sense
of power, the portrayal of Hercules' mighty physique on the frontispiece of the libretto (Illustration
14) is suggestive of a mentality somewhat different from that described by Frigimelica-Roberti.
Following the example of Frigimelica-Roberti's previous tragedies, this one employed eleven mythical
figures, four heavenly gods, and seven cori. Signora [Maria] Landini was given the role of Deianeira,
in preference to Diana Turinese, who sang as Iole. A Mantuan agent informs us that this caused the
exchange of disparaging glances between the husbands of these two singers.' The role of Hercules
was taken by Francesco Ballarini. A newcomer to the San Giovanni Grisostomo cast was Nicola Paris
(Hillo).'*

Arias in I-Rvat

Listed as Galvani SGG 29; Bonlini 311; Groppo 315; Alm 427

La Clotilde Music by Giovanni Maria Ruggieri'
[CLoriLpa]

A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Battista Neri
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1696-02-18

'6 1-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1583, letter of Angelo Robetani dated 28 Gennaro [16]95 [M.V.].

4 A soprano castrato (fl. 1645-1721), Paris spent many years in the service of the prince of Palestrina, Ferdinando Barberini, in Rome. A
complete cast list for the work is given in Saunders, Repertoire, p. 456.

'65 Ruggieri, a Venetian, was offering his first setting of an opera.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1680-89) 219

ILLUSTRATION 13 (above, left). Pausanias, as shown in the frontispiece of Frisari's libretto for // Pausania (music by Legrenzi).
The work was given at San Salvatore as 1681/10. (UCLA Libretto 271.)

ILLUSTRATION 14 (above, right). Hercules with Kerberos (the three-headed dog), as shown in Frigimelica-Roberti's libretto for
Ercole in cielo (music by Pollarolo). The work was given at San Giovanni Grisostomo as 1696/7. In Greek mythology, Kerberos
guarded the Underworld. (UCLA Libretto 427.)

220 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA
Dedicated to Lorenzo Verzusio Beretti-Landi'
Alaric II, the king of the Visigoths [485-507], was killed in battle by Clovis, the king of France. His
son Amalaric feigned peace with Clovis and sought the hand of Clovis's daughter Clotilda, who, however,
was promised to Lothar, the king of Aquitaine. Clovis now debated which union would be more politically
advantageous. The work opens in the palace of Lothar, who is about to marry Clotilda. Clotilde was
first performed on 18 February 1696 (CO). The dedicatee was in Mantua on c. 31 January 1696 as part
of the receiving party for the bride of Rinaldo d'Este, the duke of Modena, which may have delayed
the opening of the work.'

Ov Neri maintained that the outline of the plot lent itself to tragedy, but that it was impossible to present
one in San Cassiano, which he called a theater of dilettantes. He recommended some of the stage
incidents as well as the marvelous music of Ruggieri, the appearance of celebrated professors among
the dilettantes, and enchanting sets as items which would conceal the deficiencies of this libretto. The
work was later revived at San Moise under the title Amor per vendetta (1702/7). It cannot be established
whether the work on this text given at the Cocomero in Florence (Carnival 1706) used Ruggieri's music,
but it did employ Neri's text. The Florentine cast featured Margarita Salicola in the title role, with the
comic singer Antonio Maria Ristorini as Sancio.'*

Op

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SCas 29; Bonlini 310; Groppo 314; Alm 426

1696/9 L'Asmiro, re di Corinto Music by Pietro Romolo Pignatta
[AsmiRos, KING OF CORINTH]
A dramma musicale Text by Pietro Romolo Pignatta
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1696-02-18
mao Dedicated to Johann Seyfried, Prince of Eggenberg'

First given under the title // vanto d'amore at the prince's palace in 1689,' L 'Asmiro focused on the
aftermath of the siege of Corinth. In Pignatta's original version, Thomyris/Tomiri and her infant brother
Erippos were concealed in an underground passage by their uncle, Ergestes. Because they grew up
with assumed identities, the mature Erippos sought unwittingly to marry his sister. The goddess Amore,
who led them to safety, was visible only to Thomyris. In this version, Asmiros, the king of Corinth,
had fallen in love with Thomyris and sought to liberate her from the prison of Kleisthenes/Clistene,
the king of Alexandria.

'6 Serving at the time as secretary to the duke of Mantua, Beretti-Landi (1661-1725) was a virtuoso of diplomacy if not also of intrigue. After
the break-up of the duchy of Mantua (1702), he became attached to the canton of Lucerne (where in 1704 he started the Summer Nights
music festival, which continues to the present day), served as a Swiss Guard, represented Spanish interests (1703-1716), and eventually became
Spanish ambassador to Holland (1716-1721). The possibility that he was already serving Spanish interests during his years of Mantuan service
is tantalizing, for, having been involved in the procurement of musical performers there, he could also have been a conduit for Spanish comedians,
both to Mantua and to Venice.

7 Neri notes that the need for the text was not foreseen. This suggests that its predecessor, Basilio, was terminated sooner than anticipated.

68 Ristorini played an essential role in the establishment of the comic intermezzo in Venice after 1700. He was briefly in the service of Grand
Prince Ferdinand de' Medici (1698, 1703).

' The prince (1644-1713), who was also the duke of Krumlov/Cromau (Bohemia; now the Czech Republic), lived in Gradisco, near Gorizia,
where several officials of the Holy Roman Empire had summer residences. He was to be elected to the Order of the Golden Fleece in 1697.
Pignatta had been in his service since 1688 or earlier. The prince visited Venice during Carnival 1693 (arriving on 11 January, according to
CO), and it is therefore possible that Pignatta had also been present. Cesky Krumlov, on the Vitava [Moldau] River, was on the main trading
route between Bavaria and Italy. Its palace housed an impressive theater (currently awaiting restoration) of intricate seventeenth-century design.
Many Italian operas (particularly by Pallavicino and Pollarolo) were staged in it. From 1728, Eggenberg's palace near Graz hosted operas.

7 For the earliest libretto of this work, see Sartori 24316.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 221

i) The libretto for Asmiro was dedicated on 15 February 1696. The first performance was on the 18th;
Carnival ended on 6 March.'' A growing concourse of foreigners had been noted on the 1 1th (M).
The work was revived as L inganno senza danno (Treviso, 1697) and as Chi non sa fingere non sa
vincere (Vicenza, 1697/8). Ii vanto d'Amore (Suppl. 5, entry of 1700) followed the original line of the
story.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 93; Bonlini 313; Groppo 317; Alm 429

 1696a Serenata for the Duchess of Fiano. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
1696/10 ~dI Tirsi Music by Lotti (Act 1), Caldara (2), Ariosti (3), Uncertain (4, 5)
[Tirst]
A dramma pastorale (5) Text by Apostolo Zeno!
M1 Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With ballo SORTING DATE: 1696-11-03
a Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua
Loa) This pastiche was entirely for pastoral figures and emphasized Tirsi's amorous infidelities. // Tirsi opened

on 3 November 1696 (M). The haste with which it was written is suggested by the fact that the text
of the title-page of the libretto was completed by hand. It may, however, have been the dramma
pastorale' for which a license had been issued on 26 September 1696. The work had roles for three
shepherds, three nymphs who sing, and four nymphs who played instruments (two a harp, one a flauto,
and one a lute). On 17 November it was reported that the work may be beautiful but was attracting
few people (M) in comparison to La costanza in trionfo (1696/11).
A Arias in B-Bc
Listed as Galvani SSal 59; Bonlini 316; Groppo 320; Alm 433

1696/11 La costanza in trionfo Music by Marc' Antonio Ziani
[CONSTANCY IN TRIUMPH]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
i Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1696-11-05
& Dedicated to Franz Anton, Count of Berka!
Ow The sixteenth-century Swedish king Gustav usurped the throne of the Norwegian king Adolfand killed

many members of his family. When the infant princess Leonilde, who survived the massacre, grew
to be the object of Gustav's passion, she schemed to cause his downfall. La costanza was first performed
on 5 November 1696 (M); the libretto was dedicated on the 3rd.' The work was revised for a February

'" The libretto must have been prepared in great haste because it contains many typographical errors, including the name of the principal figure
in its argomento.

'? The libretto for this work was dedicated with the initials A. Z. but it was not included in Zeno's collected works.

' The license gave the title as La costanza in amor vince l'inganno, which more nearly resembles that of the following work. Yet the specified
genre (a dramma pastorale) only matches Tirsi.

* The dedicatee was the new imperial ambassador to Venice (M), succeeding Torrismondo della Torre. He may have been associated on
this occasion with a delegation of Roman visitors, for Marquis [Francesco Maria] Ruspoli arrived in Venice on the 4th with the princess of
Acquasparta, who was the niece of two cardinals (I-Vas, IS, RC, Busta 615, Fasc. Marco Marchetti, entry of 5 Novembre 1696). Over the
first three years of his embassy, Franz Anton spent almost no time in Venice (same source, entry of primo 7bre [Settembre] 1699). Berka (near
Weimar) was known for its baths. Its counts were associated with the Order of the Palm Tree, a local society which promoted the purity of
the German language, much as the Accademia della Crusca in Florence sought to protect the purity of the Italian language.

"5 Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 130) considered rumors ofa revival in 1697 ill-founded and Groppo (MS, p. 136) argued that a winter revival in 1697
would have required a libretto dated in that year. Sant' Angelo's calendar for 1696-97 certainly seems quite full.

222 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1697 revival (see 1697/1). The text was adapted by Rolli for Handel's Floridante (HWV 14; London,
1721).

Of In contrast to Tirsi, the reception of La costanza was reported on the 17th to be much appreciated
(M). Silvani praised the inimitable virtue of Ziani and contrasted the warmth of his intended expression
with the frigidity of the drama's northern setting. That the count was honored by Sant' Angelo rather
than San Giovanni Grisostomo (as most imperial ambassadors would have been) falls in line with other
reports that he was not as generous as his predecessor.'

A Score in D-AN;' arias in B-Bc; I-Vlevi, Vmc, Vnm
Listed as Galvani SAng 36; Bonlini 314; Groppo 318; Alm 430, 431

1696/12 Zenone, imperatore d'Oriente Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[XENON, EMPEROR OF THE EAST]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Marchi
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1696-11-14~
4 Dedicated to Jan Casimir Bochum'

Xenon/Zeno was the ruler of the Eastern Roman Empire in 476, when Rome was sacked and the Western
Empire collapsed. Although briefly deposed, his rule was re-established and he served until he was
murdered in 490. In the tense climate of the time his wife, Belisante,' was falsely suspected of
treachery. A number of fictional elements were added to this account. Marchi's libretto notes that the
work was written for current audiences, not for long-term storage [in a] prestigious library.

oo Zenone had opened by 17 November 1696 (M). The libretto was dedicated on the 12th. This was
Albinoni's first opera for San Cassiano, which was to be his chief sphere of theatrical activity in Venice.'
The work opened ina labyrinth within a horrid cave. Several other scenes of horror were interspersed
with pastoral and ceremonial scenes.

fi No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SCas 30; Bonlini 315; Groppo 319; Alm 432

1696/13. La Mariamme Music attributed to Giovanni Maria Ruggieri
[MIRIAM]
A dramma per musica Text by Lorenzo Burlini'*!
im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1696-11-25~
& Dedicated to Franz Heinrich, Count of Mansfeld'

6 The count sought first to rent the palace at San Geremia where Count Torrismondo della Torre had lived. His offer of 600 ducats a year
was rejected; his predecessor had paid 1000 ducats a year. Then he enquired about the palace at San Benedetto in which the duke of Mantua
had lived. He discovered that it too cost 1000 ducats a year; three years remained on the duke's lease. The count arranged to sublet the building
for 880 ducats a year (I-Vas, IS, RC, Busta 592, fasc. Cremona, 1695-98, account of 11 Novembre 1696). Berka was absent for most of those
three years. At the start of 1699 he became embroiled in a similar dispute for a new location, the palace on Calle del Meglio belonging to the
Battaglia family (Joc. cit., entry of 18 gennaro 1699).

77 Score recently discovered by Dubowy (see  I trionfi', pp. 113-22, under the title Leonide).

"8 A special envoy from Poland. An item high on the Polish agenda was the likely amalgamation with Saxony, and the text of Zenone could
have had a double meaning in portraying the East as enlightened, if troubled.

' Corresponding to the historical Ariadne.

8 Albinoni spent much of his life in the nearby parishes of San Barnaba and San Trovaso (sestier of Dorsoduro). San Cassiano (sestier of
Santa Croce) lay in close proximity to the parishes (e.g., San Giacomo dall'Orio) favored by Poles, Bohemians, and other central Europeans.
8! A Venetian, Burlini wrote two libretti for SS. Giovanni e Paolo in its waning years.

' The count of Mansfeld (1646-1715) had been elected to the Order of the Golden Fleece in 1685. On the night of 2 January 1697 he may
have offended some of the other dignitaries resident in Venice by failing to attend a private chamber concert featuring the singer Matteo Sassani
(Matteucci), an anonymous singer, and a Bolognese cellist (RC, Busta 592, letter of Lodovico Fr. Cremona dated 3 Genaro /697).

1696/14

oRORC)

1696/15

ry

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 223

In this pastoral treatment of Greco-Roman history from the first century AD, the beauty of Miriam,
the wife of Herod, the king of Judaea, aroused the jealousy of her sister-in-law, Salome.'* Several
episodes of the plot, which was situated in Jerusalem, were freely invented. The libretto called attention
to ways in which the text could be abbreviated. La Mariamme is most likely to have opened during
the latter half of November 1696. The dedicatee was in Venice from the start of October through 24
January 1697 to negotiate troop allocations and finances on behalf of the imperial ambassador (M).
He was feted around the first of the new year.'TM The title-page says autumn.

Arias in B-Bc

Listed as Galvani SSGP 94; Bonlini 317; Groppo 321; Alm 434

Amor' e dover" Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[LovE AND DuTY]

A dramma per musica Text by Domenico David
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a danza SORTING DATE: 1696-12-26

Dedicated to Ferdinando III de' Medici, Grand Prince of Tuscany

Matilda, the daughter of Beatrice d'Este and a Tuscan count in the eleventh century, was instructed
by her mother, newly remarried mother to a cousin, Geoffrey of Lorraine, to marry Geoffrey's crippled
son (Geoffrey the Hunchback). In encouraging the union, Beatrice was torn between her love for the
prince and her royal duty, Matilda by love for her mother and personal disinterest. A confrontation over
feudal lands with Henry IV of Germany was brewing.'** The action was set in Ferrara.

This work was first officially performed on 26 December 1696 (CO); its rehearsal on 21 December
attracted a large audience (M). The title-page is dated 1697. The work was criticized (M) for the fact
that the sets [did] not correspond to the music,' although the Corriere ordinario reported that the
drama, the music, and the voices were universally praised.'* Maria Domenica Pini sang as Matilda,
with Matteo Sassani (Goffredo). Michel Angelo Gasparini appeared as the councillor Silvio.'*

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SGG 30; Bonlini 318; Groppo 322; Alm 436

L'Erifile' Music by Attilio Ariosti'
[ERIPHYLE]

A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Battista Neri
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1696-12-27

Dedicated to Marquis Filippo Rangoni, Duke of Spilimberg'
In Cyprus, while a plague raged, a search was made for the most beautiful virgin. The gods would be
placated, it was held, by throwing her into the sea. In this account the tale was embroidered to the point

'8 The names are falsified so that Herod becomes Agrippe and Salome becomes Elisa.
' See the Mercuri of 6 Ottobre and 22 Dicembre 1696 as well as I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 145, f. 16, entry of 12 Gennaro 1697.

'8 The text may have been making a veiled reference to the situation of the dedicatee, who had wed the Bavarian princess Violante Beatrice

in 1688.

'8 [-Vnm, Cod. It. VI-474 (= 12118), entry of 19. Gennaro 1696 M.V. (...la composizione di quella che si e recitata non corrisponde alla
musica). This statement has other possible interpretations.

87 A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1697, entry of 29 Decembre 1696.

'88 4 complete cast list is given in Saunders, Repertoire, p. 457.

'8 Ariosti (1666-1729), a Servite priest, was about to enter the service of Sophie Charlotte (cf. 1690/6), a protestant, in Berlin. Among his
musical skills, Ariosti was a player of the viola d'amore. G. Rossi claimed without foundation that the music was anonymous.

' Through intermarriage, the Rangoni were closely connected with both the Gonzaga of Mantua and the Este of Modena.

224

COs

1697/1

im

&

oo)

1697/2

i

&

oI)

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

of unrecognizability. Eriphyle was captured by Tigranes, the king of Cyprus, and now one of the king's
sons had fallen in love with her.'*'

L'Erifile opened on 27 December 1696 (CO). A license to print its libretto had been issued on the 17th
for 1697. Neri praised the sweet harmony of the Bolognese priest Ariosti, saying that his melodies
were entertaining the most important monarchs of Europe. Among the striking scenes were one in which
Fortune rose on her wheel from the sea and another in which a musician sang a capriccio.' The work
may not have been a critical success, because a printing license for its successor was issued within a
week of its opening.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SSal 60; Bonlini 319; Groppo 323; Alm 437

I regi equivoci Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
{THE RULERS WHO MISUNDERSTOOD ONE ANOTHER]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1697-01-12

Dedicated to Alberto Gozzi, N.V.'?

The Assyrian prince Eumenes was not permitted to rule until he was twenty-two years old. When his
father died, the scepter passed to his cousin Roxane. Eumenes greeted this development with jealousy,
although he was secretly enchanted by Roxane's beauty. / regi equivoci opened on 12 January 1697
(CO). It was much appreciated on the 19th (M). It was still in production, though enjoying little
attendance, on 9 February (M), although another report (CO) of the same date said that a revised version
of La costanza in trionfo (1696/11) had been mounted at Sant' Angelo.

Arias in B-Bc

Listed as Galvani SAng 37; Bonlini 323; Groppo 327; Alm 442, 443

Il Tigrane, re d'Armenia Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[TIGRANES, KING OF ARMENIA]

A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1697-01-19

Dedicated to Felipe Antonio Spinola Colonna, Duke of Sesto!

After acceding to the throne of Armenia, the ambitious Tigranes sought to marry Oronta, the daughter
of his predecessor. An Athenian rebellion interfered with his plans. Tigrane opened on 19 January 1697
(CO). On the 26th it was said to be much applauded (M). It was still in production on 9 February,
when it was said to include some exquisite voices (M). A license to print the libretto had been issued
on 9 January 1696 M.V. Corradi praised the virtue of Albinoni, saying that music of such accomplishment
rendered the label dilettante an understatement of his skill.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SCas 31; Bonlini 320; Groppo 324; Alm 438

'! Independent of other elements of the story, the name Eriphyle came to suggest the casting of a beautiful woman.

'? Here probably meaning an improvised song.

83 Gozzi was a major benefactor of several institutions, among them the Ospedale della Pieta and the Scuola Grande della Carita.

'% The duke was expected to be appointed the ambassador to Padua, but this did not come to pass (RC, Busta 592, letter from Lodovico Fr.
Cremona, 4 Marzo 1697).

1697/3



1697/4

rT

a

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 225

I rivali generosi Music attributed to Marc' Antonio Ziani
[THE GENEROUS RIVALS]

A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1697-01-21~

Dedicated to Franz Heinrich, Count of Mansfeld!

The text treats the triumphs of Justinian's general Belisarius over the Visigoths in the sixth century.
Amorous interests revolved on Elpidia, the princess of Puglia, who was admired by both a Greek prince
and the king of the Goths. In a subplot another Greek prince fell in love with a Gothic princess. The
action took place in Ravenna, which, after being besieged in 538, was to be the second most important
city of the Italian peninsula for the next five centuries.'

A license to print the libretto was issued on 2 January 1696 M.V. The production opened between 19
and 26 January 1696 M.V., probably nearer the first date, since the count, who was feted by the Republic
on the 12th, left Venice on the 24th (M). The work was still running on 9 February 1696 M.V., when
the production (Ja composizione dell opera) was praised (M). The Corriere (9 February), amplifying
a report from the Mercurio of 26 January, reported that the work was extraordinarily applauded.
One of the singers, Matteo Sassani (II Matteucci) accepted an invitation by the French ambassador
to give a private concert on 2 January. It took place in a palace on the Grand Canal with doors wide
open, so that the sound accidentally attracted a water-borne audience. The concert lasted until 3:30
O.V. Sassani sang with great alertness (veglia) and was very well received by an indoor audience
consisting of the ambassador, the papal legate, the receiver of Malta, their respective courts, and various
other dignitaries.'"' Another singer and a Bolognese priest who played the viola (both unidentified)
also participated.'*

T rivali was given in Florence during Carnevale 1698. The text of J rivali was reset for Naples in
1700.'? On 12 March 1701 Zeno wrote to Lodovico Antonio Muratori in Modena that his text was
to be given again, now in a setting by Giannettini.2 A pastiche version was given in Reggio in the
spring of 1710.7" Segments of the original work were combined by Handel with arias from later Venetian
operas to create the pastiche Elpidia (HWV 1A; King's Theatre, London, 1725).

Arias in A-Wn; F-Pn; GB-Ob

Listed as Galvani SSal 61; Bonlini 324; Groppo 328; Alm 444

Tito Manlio* Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[TiTUs MANLIus]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Matteo Noris
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1697-01-31
Without dedication

'S The count of Mansfeld was also now the Grand Marshal of the Holy Roman Empire.

'6 Venetians were newly reminded of this by Coronelli's newly published Ravenna antica e modera. Elements of Zeno's treatment may have
come from Procopios' Anecdotes [sixth century].

'' The named parties were all of great ceremonial importance in the liturgy of the ducal basilica, San Marco.

'8 The count of Mansfeld declined to attend because he was being feted by the Venetian nobility on the same night. The venue for Matteucci's
concert was said to be near the palace of the widow Grassi (I-Vas, IS, RC, Busta 592, Fasc. Cremona, entry of 3 Genaro /697, apparently
anew-style date, since Mansfeld was not in Venice a year later). A Grassi palace was adjacent to the Ca' Foscari, where many foreign diplomats

rented premises.

' See Griffin Doc. 134 (entry of 2 November 1700).

20 Tettere, i, 44.

20! The music was by Clemente Monari, Francesco Antonio Pistocchi, and Gio. Maria Cappelli (Fabbri and Verti, Due secoli, p. 51).

226

Ow

Os

1697/5

i

[a
@

fi

 1697a
 1697b

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

The consul Titus Manlius Torquatus was the subject of Roman legends extolling both mercy anda stern
sense of justice. In the third century BC, he subdued Latin rebellions. In this account he sent his like-
named son, Manlius, to suppress such rebellions. Tito Manlio is reported to have opened on 31 January
1697 (CO), a normally prohibited date for theatrical activity. Its opening was already anticipated on
the 19th (M). It had been given at Pratolino, the summer residence of the Grand Duke of Tuscany, on
20 September 1696, and was to be repeated in Venice at the end of the year as 1697/9. It was given
in Giannettini's setting in Reggio (spring 1701).

The Corriere (2 February) commented enthusiastically on the final scene, in which a machine representing
the Tiber dazzled the audience, and noted on the 9th that the work was extraordinarily applauded.
The Mercurio related that, unlike Amor' e dover (1696/14), Tito was well received. On the same date
it was praised in the Mercurio for its music but not for its sets or singers. The librettist acknowledged
that the order of some scenes had been changed, arias added, and the overall length significantly reduced,
but that the work's heroic character had not been diminished. Antonio Francesco Carli took the role
of Tito, with Matteo Sassani as Manlio. Michel Angelo Gasparini held down two roles  those of Decio,
captain of the Phalanges, and Germinio, captain of the Latins. The famous virtuosa who was given
1200 doppie in jewels and coins from Baron Martini was probably Maria Domenica Pini (Servilia)
rather than Angiola Gringher (Vitelia). Both were in their first season at the theater.

Score (Pratolino): D-SW1; arias in B-Be; I-Ne

Listed as Galvani SGG 31; Bonlini 322; Groppo 326; Alm 440, 441

La promessa serbata al primo Music by Antonio CaldaraTM
[THE BETROTHED WHO WAS RESERVED FOR THE FIRST (SUITOR)]

A dramma per musica Librettist unknown?
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1697-02-07
Without dedication

In this tale of ancient Sparta, Hermione, the daughter of Menelaus, was promised in marriage to Orestes.
Unaware of this arrangement, her father offered her hand to Achilles. Conflicting dates are given for
the opening. The Mercurio (19 January) reports that the second work of the season in this theater opened
on 14 January, while the Corriere (9 February) cites the opening by title on 7 February, by which date,
according to the Mercurio, attendance had dwindled. The anonymous librettist noted that the work had
been written ina few days, suggesting that the preceding work [La Mariamme] had had a poor reception.
The production was prepared (M) by an unidentified Prince Colonna.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SSGP 96; Bonlini 325; Groppo 329; Alm 445

La felicita d'Imenei dal Destino. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Serenata at the palace of the duke of Mantua. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

202 There the cast included Antonio Borosini (Tito), Francesco de Grandis (Manlio), and Margarita Salicola Suini (Servilia). See Fabbri and
Verti, Due secoli, p. 51.

23 The gift was given, it seems, at a pranzo hosted by the baron for the duke of Sesto [F. A. Spinola Colonna] and Count Aguillar on 23 January
(M). A full cast list for the work is given in Saunders, Repertoire, p. 457.

204 A Venetian cellist and singer, Caldara spent most of his adult life at courts in Mantua (Gonzaga), Rome (Ruspoli), and Vienna (imperial).
Excluding his contribution to // Tirsi and the lost trattenimento called Argene (Suppl. 7), this was his first known dramatic setting in Venice.
He and his father had played in the orchestra at Sant' Angelo for a number of years (information kindly provided by Gastone Vio).

2 Galvani (Teatri, p. 52) says the text was a pastiche.
206 T-Vnm, Cod. It. VI-474 ( = 12118), entry of 12 Gennaro 1696 M.V.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 227

1697/6 Primislao, primo re di Boemia Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[PREMYSL, THE FIRST KING OF BOHEMIA]
A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
M1 Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1697-11-09
a Dedicated to Giacomo Riccardi, Venetian Sergeant-General in the Levant?
we The peasant Premys| founded Prague. Pfemysl's high-born wife, LibuSe, was widely known for her

learning. From the Piemyslid dynasty which was established in the eighth century the later entity of
Bohemia emerged. The first of the work's four balli was for the Four Elements (Earth, Air, Fire, and
Water) and the second for the four parts of the world. The second featured a globe which opens
up into the four parts of the world and shows all its peoples.

OOn Primislao opened on 9 November 1697 (CO, M), the date of the dedication of the libretto. A good
attendance was reported on the 16th (M). Smetana's Libuse (Prague, 1881) was centered on the same
two principal roles (LibuSe and Pfemysl). Josef Wenzig's German text (1866), which portrayed Libu8e
as wise and Premysl as lucky (for having been selected to be her husband), took on Czech nationalistic
overtones in the later nineteenth century. An element of Bohemian nationalism is already expressed
in the Corradi text.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SCas 32; Groppo 331; Bonlini 327; Alm 448

1697/7 Eumene Music attributed to Marc' Antonio Ziani
[EUMENES]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
i Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SorTING DATE: 1697-11-12
& Without dedication
 As he lay dying, Aristarchos, the king of Cappadocia, left the care of his infant daughter Artemis to

his sister Laodikeia, who tried to manoeuver herself onto the throne. After preliminary success, she
fell in love with the Macedonian captain Eumenes. He, in turn, fell in love with Artemis. Zeno claimed
to have taken the story from Plutarch." In preparation by 26 October (M), Eumene opened on 12
November 1697 (CO, NV) and enjoyed universal applause (I-Rvat A). It was revived at San Moise
as 1722/11. Albinoni set a different version of the story (1717/9) between these productions.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SAng 38; Bonlini 329; Groppo 333; Alm 450

?7 Several important naval battles were fought in the eastern Mediterranean between June and October 1697. The results favored the Venetians.
Riccardi was probably returning from one of these. Meanwhile, the son of Baron Taxis, en route from Bohemia to Naples, stopped in Venice
around the time this work opened, providing a tie-in between the plot and one possible attendee; Taxis left c. 15 November (NV).

208

The staging is reminiscent of that in one of Corradi's earliest libretti, La divisione del mondo (music by Legrenzi, 1675/2). Alchemy had
been a prominent interest of some courts in Central Europe (especially that of Rudolf II in Prague), and, in common with other physical sciences,
it was attracting new interest through the writings and assemblies devoted to the work of Vincenzo Coronelli and other investigators. Coronelli
(1650-1718) was one of the most enterprising of Venetian academicians. In contrast to the literary interests of the Arcadians, who were bent
on reform, Coronelli and his Argonauts were intent on expanding knowledge of geography, navigation, astronomy, and the other sciences
rooted in the physical world. They produced thirteen volumes of the At/ante veneto and other books in the 1690s.

20 Another work with Bohemian associations is 1696/9.

210 Personal details are largely lacking in Plutarch's account. Aristarchos is given as Aristarfo in the libretto, although Aristarco must have
been intended.

228 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1697/8 Circe abbandonata da Ulisse Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[CIRCE ABANDONED BY ULYSSES]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1697-11-13
& Dedicated to Lorenzo Verzusio Beretti-Landi"'

The sorceress Circe, who changed Ulysses' men into pigs, failed to control the voyager, who resisted
her spells by taking a special herb. After living with her for a year, he and his men set sail for the
Underworld. In this account, Polydoros, the prince of Troy, arrived at Circe's island ahead of Ulysses,
thereby changing the story.

Oo@ Although announced for the 11th (NV), Circe opened on 13 November 1697 and enjoyed universal
applause (CO, I-Rvat A); the libretto had been dedicated on the 12th. On the 16th, all three currently
operating theaters were reported to be enjoying robust attendance (gran gente), and on the 23rd the
applause and concourse, especially of foreigners was again noted.' The appearance of a French
virutosa had been announced on 26 October (M). Aureli commented wryly in the libretto that although
Circe had been abandoned by Ulysses, she could enjoy the attention of the secretary of state to the duke
of Mantua [the dedicate].

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 97; Bonlini 328; Groppo 332; Alm 449

1697/9 Tito Manlio Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[TiTUs MANLIUs]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Matteo Noris
M1 Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With ballo SORTING DATE: 1697-12-26
& Without dedication
 This revised version of 1697/4 opened on 26 December 1697 with as much applause as it had received

the preceding year (NV)."* All of the theaters were closed from the 27th until after Epiphany (6
January).?!> The work had been shortened without altering the major historical facts. Several roles
were recast. Domenico Cecchi now sang as Manlio, replacing Matteo Sassani."

A Score (Pratolino): D-SWI; arias in B-Bc; I-Ne
Listed as Galvani SGG 33; Bonlini 333; Groppo 337; Alm 454

1698/1 Odoardo Music attributed to Marc' Antonio Ziani
[EDwarD]

A dramma per musica Text apparently by Apostolo Zeno!

i Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1698-01-04

2!! Currently secretary of state to the duke of Mantua.
22 LRvat, AS, NV, N. 145, ff. 836 and 845.

23 The duke of Mantua was notorious, even among his cohort of dukes and princes, for his liaisons. Ferdinand Carlo's taste favored comediennes;
many of his peers preferred cantatrici.

214 4 hand emendation on the title-page of US-LAu 441 gives the year of the revival as 1698. In this event, it could have been the subject of
the reference sperano farci campeggiare le principali voci d'Italia in the Mercurio of 26 October 1697.

215 |_Rvat, AS, NV, N. 145, f, 1037v.
2!6 For a full cast list see Saunders, Repertoire, p. 457.

717 Although the libretto was signed by Zeno, Odoardo did not appear in his collected works. The Weavers (op. cit., p. 189) cite an argument
for its having been by Silvani; Galvani (Teatri, pp. 116f) reviewed the evidence for Zeno's authorship.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 229

& Dedicated to Charles Montagu, Count of Manchester!

Oo The unscrupulous English king Edwin [955-958] was the antithesis of his brother, Edgar (the Pacifist),
who was replete with virtues. Edgar (whose name was changed here to Edward/Odoardo to suit the
Italian ear) succeeded to the throne [958-975] after his brother's death. Odoardo opened with applause
(NV) on 4 January 1698 (CO)." The work was given in Florence at the Cocomero during Carnival
1701. Scarlatti's setting opened in Naples, with newly added comic scenes, on 5 May 1700.

A Arias in GB-Ob; I-Rvat
Listed as Galvani SAng 39; Bonlini 332; Groppo 336; Alm 453

1698/2 L'ingratitudine gastigata Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[INGRATITUDE PUNISHED]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani'
rl Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1698-01-17
a Dedicated to Franz Ferdinand, Count of Salbourg!

The fanciful plot was loosely based on Merovingian history. It mainly concerned the fortunes of Alaric,
who had been taken from Germany to Norway as a 3-year-old by Vandals fleeing the campaign of his
father, Ernst. Now grown, Alaric had himself been proclaimed king of the Vandals but had made the
error of falling in love with Ginevra, the wife of one of his generals. In a subplot Briinnhilde, the widow
of Ernst, was protected by Aistolf. Silvani asked the reader to forgive him for liberties he had taken
with facts and to concentrate instead on the music.

Cec L'ingratitudine opened on 17 January 1698 (NV), the date of dedication of the libretto [17 January
1697 M.V.]. The title-page is dated 1698. The Venetian production may have been poorly attended,
since there were heavy snows in late January and early February (M); Lent began on 19 February. A
musical work on the same text which was given in Florence during Carnival 1701 bore the title Alarico,
re de' Vandali. The present work had a revival at San Cassiano (1702/4); the Florentine cast performed
the work again in Palermo (1705).

A Score in D-MUs
Listed as Galvani SCas 33; Bonlini 330; Groppo 334; Alm 451

1698/3 La forza d'amore' Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[THE POWER OF LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text by Lorenzo Burlini

im Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

Without known incidental items SORTING DATE: 1698-01-17

218 Montagu, who would make his public entrance as special ambassador on 3 February 1698, had arrived on 21 December 1697. He was sent
to Venice by Prince William of Orange [William III] (I-Rvat, AS, NV, dispatch of 7 Xmbre [Dicembre] 1697). The ascension of the Protestant
prince to the English throne was not recognized by the papacy, to whom this missive was directed, since William replaced the deposed Catholic
king, James II. According to Montagu's secretary, Christian Cole (Memoires, pp. 2-7), the mission's purpose was to arrange a friendlier reception
of British merchants by Venetian commanders in the Levant and to settle long-standing debts of Venetian merchants.

219 The reference is surrounded by material concerning the 5th, but Carnival officially opened on the 7th. An important but unidentified English
noble arrived during the week ending 18 January.

220 In the dedication of L 'innocenza giustificata at the end of the year Silvani complained that rumors had maintained that the text was not
really written by him but rather by a then deceased author.

22 He held the title of imperial chamberlain. The libretto praises his victories over the Ottomans in Hungary and on the Morean peninsula.
?22 In historical accounts Briinnhilde, the daughter of Athanagild, was a Visigoth and her husband, King Sigebert, was a Frank.

23 The libretto fora 1702 revival said that this production had been given during the last fifteen days of Carnival in 1698, which implies (apparently
incorrectly) a later opening.

24 The Weavers (Florentine Theater, pp. 188f.) consider it to have been a musical pastiche which included music by Gasparini.

230 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Dedicated to Francesco Bonelli

Op

Valeria, a Sicilian noblewoman, was abducted by Dionysios, the king of Syracuse. Valeria's lover Harry
(Arrigo) assumed the disguise of a musician in order to rescue her. Burlini indicated in his note to
the reader that the work had to be modified on account of severe opposition and regretted that the text
would never be known in its original state. La forza opened on 17 January 1698 (NV). The title-page
is dated 1697.

A No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SSGP 95; Bonlini 321; Groppo 325; Alm 439

1698/4 Marzio Coriolano* Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[MARTIUS CORIOLANUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1698-01-18
a Dedicated to Charles Montagu, Duke of Manchester
oo The Roman general Martius Coriolanus was instrumental in defeating the Volscians but was prevented

from being elected a consul because of his disdain for starving plebeians.* Marzio Coriolano was
first performed on 18 January 1698 (A, CO), the date of dedication of the libretto. There were no
performances at San Giovanni Grisostomo after 9 February (M); Shrove Tuesday fell two days later.
The title-page is dated 1698. The dedicatee had written to the duke of Shrewsbury on 17 December
1697 that the only diversion I can propose to myself is their music, which is now begun and will be
in perfection this carnival.** Great applause for Marzio was reported on 1 February (M). By the time
of Montagu's public entry on 3 February, two hundred English lords had arrived in Venice.*!
A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SGG 32; Bonlini 331; Groppo 335; Alm 452

 1698 Il tempio della gloria. Cf. Suppl. 6.
1698/5 Camilla, regina de' volsci Music attributed to Giovanni Bononcini?
[CAMILLA, QUEEN OF THE VOLSCIANS]
A dramma in musica Text attributed to Silvio Stampiglia
r1 Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Summer (Assumption)

5 A duke, he was in 1698 a captain of the Milanese army. He later defected to the Turkish side.

6 The characterization and plot development are widely at variance with those of Noris's Dionisio (1681).

27 There is some possibility that the family of the Spanish ambassador, Juan Moles, attended a performance. His wife lent the keys to their
box to some Paduan gentlewomen for the night of Sunday 26th January. See I-Vas, IS, RC, Busta 592, entry of 21 Genaro [16]98. The theater
is not named in the account, but Moles was previously associated with SS. Giovanni e Paolo.

8 The plot is significantly different from that of the like-named work given in 1683.

2 The libretto was dedicated on 18 January 1697 M.V. The opening date is confirmed in I-Rvat, AS, NV [N. 146, f. 44y, entry to 18 Gennaro
1698], where the work is cited as // Mario Coriolano.

20 Quoted in Gibson, Royal Academy, pp. 92f.
33! See the Mercuri of 25 Gennaro 1698, f. 2v, and 8 Febraro 1697/8, ff. lv-2v.

2. The Modenese composer Giovanni Bononcini had close ties to the Venetian comic theater through his marriage into the Balletti family
(Selfridge-Field, La guerra de' comici, p. 231). Bononcini's wife, Riccoboni's wife, and the comedian Francesco Balletti were siblings
(information kindly provided by Lowell Lindgren). Some bibliographies (e.g., Galvani, Teatri, p. 98) erroneously assign the work to Marc' Antonio
Bononcini.

53 Stampiglia (1645-1725), an Arcadian, was born and died in Rome. He wrote the texts for a number of oratorios before creating the text
of Camilla, which proved to be one of the most durable works of the Baroque operatic repertory. He was active in Naples as an opera composer
from 1696 to 1702. Minato is the presumed author of a libretto for La regina de' volschi given at the Fugger palace in Augsburg in 1690. Its
music was by Draghi.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 231

With balli SORTING DATE: 1698-10-06

a Dedicated to Marc' Antonio Borghese, Prince of RossanoTM*
Camilla, the virgin daughter of the late king and queen of the Volscians, was living as the shepherdess
Dorinda. She was an accomplished huntress. Many episodes involving the Volscians and their enemies,
the Latins, were elaborated in this plot, probably to suit the prince's Arcadian sympathies.

 When the Venetian production opened on 6 October 1698 (PV), it elicited universal satisfaction (NV).
Two explanations exist for the unusually early date of opening. According to one report (CO), it was
prompted by an exceptionally wet autumn, which roused the nobility from villeggiatura. Meanwhile,
the state visit of Czar Peter the Great, who had arrived on 29 July, could have called for special
entertainments. He was accompanied by two palaces of attendants and was seeking the help of the
Venetians in repulsing the Turks.
Camilla ran continuously until at least 30 November (M). It was apparently revived after L 'innocenza
giustificata (1698/9), for it was in the midst of a run on 16 January 1699 (BG). Venetian attendees at
the original production must have been few: BG (contradicting CO) indicated (16 October 1698) that
the other theaters would delay their openings until the nobility returned from villeggiatura.

O0 The production of Camilla was quite exceptional with respect to the ticket price of one-quarter ducat,
an unusually high price which caused considerable comment (M). An already famous work, Camilla
had had its premiere in Naples on 27 December 1696 and was given in Rome in January 1698, in
Florence during Carnival 1698, and in Mantua on an undetermined date in the same year. In all, Camilla
enjoyed at least 38 productions through 1765; most used the music of Bononcini. Among the early ones,
the translation by Owen MacSwiney (later called Swiney) attracted significant attention to Italian opera
in Bononcini's setting (London, 1706), which enjoyed more than 100 performances through 1728.78
Nicole Minato's text, La regina de' Volsci, which was set by Antonio Draghi (with ballets by Schmelzer)
for the Empress Eleonora Maddalena on 6 January 1690, may have been inspired this work.

fi Scores in D-B, DIb, MUs; F-Pc (inc.); GB-AB,? Lbl; I-MOe, Nc; US-Aut, Wlc (Naples, 1696); arias
in I-PAc
Listed as Galvani SSal 62; Bonlini 334; Groppo 338; Alm 455

1698/6 L'Egisto, re di Cipro Music by Marc' Antonio Ziani
[AIGISTHOS, KING OF CYPRUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
r Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1698-11-08
a Dedicated to Pietro Businello, N.V.

24 Normally resident in Rome, the Borghese family had a great love of music which was filtered by an Arcadian perspective. Marc' Antonio
was unusually public-spirited and opened the grounds of his villa to the public, all days but Monday, in 1700. He would sympathize with the
Empire in the emerging rift between France and Austria.

235 A revised version of the libretto, which included new arias in Act I, Scene 3, was dedicated by the printer Girolamo Albrizzi on the 4th.

236 An advance party, led by General Szeremet, had arrived late in Carnival of the preceding winter with a large number of his compatriots
(CO, 18 January 1698).

237 Griffin, Gazzetta, Doc. 102. An anonymous Camilla, Kenigin der Volscher was given in Weissenfels on 5 November 1694 (Stieger,
Opernlexikon, iv, 63). Stieger also cites the setting by Draghi and the Emperor Leopold I in Augsburg in 1690 (op. cit., iv, 56).

238 See Lowell Lindgren's article on the work in NGDMM/2.
239 Facs. edn., IOB, 17.

240 Businello, a cavalier, was named to the high office of Cancelliere Grande at roughly the same time as this work opened (NV). The election
may have been made in absentia, for in the issue of Pallade Veneta for 18-25 Ottobre 1698 (f. 2), he was reported to be in Milan, where
he admired the palace of Marquis Pagani. On 29 Novembre (op. cit., f. 2) his return to Venice was still awaited; on 19 December (op. cit.,
f. 2v) he was said to be detained there by illness. Preto's data (Servizi segreti, p. 452) suggests, however, that what detained Businello in Milan
was his effort to obtain (clandestinely) a copy of territorial plans that concerned the border between the duchy and the Venetian Republic.
It is unlikely that he witnessed a performance of this work.

232 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

The central character in this work was not the powerful Cypriot king AigisthosTM" but rather the humble
Helphenike/Elfenice, a gentlewoman of Thebes who was without resources and served Aigisthos's
daughter Doriclea.* Aigisthos's son Kleitarchos fell in love with Helphenike. To avoid marriage to
a suitor selected by the king, Helphenike consecrated herself to the Vestal Virgins.

OO ws A license to print the libretto was issued on 30 October 1698, and it was in rehearsal by 1 November.
Although two reports claim that it was scheduled to open on 17 November (PV, A), NV says that it
opened on the 8th. The opening curtain was to rise in the middle of the sinfonia and reveal Alidoros
(the king's preferred suitor for his daughter) and Helphenice moving from a loge into a small garden.
In the ballo at the end of Act 1, vases of flowers were transmuted into a group of young women
(damigelle). One of the balli in Act 2 was for the courtesans of all nations. Some of the scenery 
including the Hall of Mirrors in Act 2 and the Temple of Cynthia in Act 3  was relatively unusual.
An appeal to French taste can be inferred from these traits."

A Arias in B-Be
Listed as Galvani SCas 34; Bonlini 335; Groppo 339; Alm 456

1698/7 Radamisto Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[RHADAMISTHOS]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Marchi
rT Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1698-11-17
& Dedicated to Girolamo Pesaro, N.V.*

Or @ Tiridates, the king of Assyria, fell in love with Zenobia, the wife of Rhadamisthos (here the king of
Iberia). Enraged by jealousy, Rhadamisthos overcame the attacker and became the king of Armenia.
A license to print the libretto was dated 4 November 1698; the libretto was dedicated on 11 November.
The work was in rehearsal by the Ist and was scheduled to open on the 17th (PV, A). The last
performance before the theaters closed for Advent was on 29 November (M). The revival given in
Florence in 1712 may have been a model for Handel's Radamisto (HWV 12; London, 1720, et al.).
Marchi claimed in a note to the reader that the solos in this work existed in the spheres of [a] poetic
Heaven.

A Arias in GB-Lgc
Listed as Galvani SAng 40; Bonlini 336; Groppo 340; Alm 457

1698/8 La saggia pazzia di Giunio Bruto Music by Gio. Maria Ruggieri
[THE SAVVY MADNESS OF JUNIUS BRUTUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Lotto Lotti'

M1 Performed at SS. Giovanni e PaoloTM* SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)

With balli and a combattimento SORTING DATE: 1698-11-26

4! Aigisthos was here the king of Cyprus, while in most accounts he was the king of Mycenae (and the seducer of Clytemnestra).
 The thrust of the text is not even loosely related to Marco Faustini's favola musicale called L 'Egisto, which was set by Cavalli in 1643.

4 This curious outcome might have been motivated by an effort to trade on the same success as Camilla, which opened one month earlier,
while alluding to the noted Cavalli setting of Marco Faustini's L 'Egisto (1643).

24 The Hall of Mirrors was, of course, inspired by the new palace at Versailles. George Cowart has amassed illuminating material on the ball
des nations in the context of French theater at exactly this time.

245 A procurator who currently served as mayor (podesta) of Bergamo.

246 Marchi's plotis significantly different from Bentivoglio's (Tiridate, 1669/3). Musical intermezzi for Radamisto, Zenobia, Rosino, and Silvano
were cued in an anonymous Scenario del Tiridate ovvero Il re da scena nel giuoco della fortuna given at the Seminario Romano in Rome
(Carnival 1695). Its libretto (Sartori 21120) was dedicated to Cardinal Pietro Ottoboni.

247 Totti was from Bologna.

248 La saggia pazzia is also said in the libretto to have been performed in a private house in the parish of Santa Marina.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 233

& Dedicated to Alvise Morosini, N.V.
The Roman consul Lucius Junius Brutus was the enemy of Tarquinius Superbus, the founder of the
Republic, in the sixth century BC. Brutus survived conflict by feigning madness after the death of Lucretia
and was eventually recognized as the wise liberator of his country.

ic?) A new work by Ruggieri had been announced during the week 4-11 October 1698 (PV) and also for
17 November (A), when Monsignor Barbarigo was to take office. The work was first performed with
distinction on the 26th, when it earned the praises of everyone.** The libretto had been dedicated
on the 24th. Since in 1698 all opera productions were suspended for Advent on 29 November,*" this
work may have run for several weeks after Christmas.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSGP 98; Bonlini 337; Groppo 341; Alm 458

 1698b Il finto Esau overo Gli odi fraterni. Cf. Suppl. 8.
1698/9 L'innocenza giustificata Music by Benedetto Vinaccesi?
[INNOCENCE JUSTIFIED]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
1 Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1698-12-26
a Dedicated to Ferdinand Ernst, Imperial Count of Mollarth'?

Silvani's text was concerned with the division of Charlemagne's empire in the ninth century. His son,
Ludwig the Pious, had three sons  Lothar, Pepin, and Ludwig  from his first marriage. After the
death of his first wife, Ludwig the Elder married Judith, the daughter of the duke of Bavaria, and she
produced a fourth son  Charles. The division of the father's property [c. 843] caused much conflict
among the brothers, with the result (in this account) that Lothar waged war on the other three and accused
his step-mother of adultery with a Spanish duke in order to gain the empire. Repercussions of this
division carried through German and French political history into modern times.

CO L'innocenza opened on 26 December 1698 (NV). Its title-page is dated 1699; its libretto was dedicated
on 24 December 1698. The production included balli in this work for Spanish and French cavaliers
and for German rockets (incendiari). Silvani praised the fertile bizzaria of Vinaccesi's ideas.
Nonetheless, Camilla (1698/5) was revived after this run terminated. Silvani's text hada long life, both
in direct derivations and in tropes on its various strands. The text was reset by Chelleri as 1722/4.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSal 63; Bonlini 338; Groppo 342; Alm 460

49 Minato's Le varieta di. fortuna in Lucio Giunio Bruto, set by Draghi, with contributions by Leopold I, for performance in Vienna in 1692,
seems to have developed a similar story.

250 Pallade veneta, p. 231.

25! |-Rvat, AS, Fondo Awvisi, N. 122, entry of 6 December 1698, f. lv.

252 Vinaccesi was a gentleman from Brescia.

253 The count was to become an imperial administrator in the reign of Joseph I (1705-1711).

> The story lent dignity to the dedicatee, since Charles was made Holy Roman Emperor in 875. Many of the historical implications of the
libretto are in conflict with modern histories. The province of Lorraine is supposed to have been named after Lothar.

255 On the first see L 'innocenza difesa (1722). The specialized extrapolations especially included works elaborating on the Bavarian line. Among
the most notable settings were Chelleri's (as Feraspe, Milan, 1711) and Orlandini's (as L innocenza difesa, Ferrara, 1712; Bologna, 1713
as Carlo, re d'Allemagna; Verona, 1714; and as L innocenza giutificata, Fano, 1731). Chelleri's L 'innocenza difesa was given in Florence
(1721) and Venice (1722).

234

1698/10

i

rs)
cae)

1699/1

rd

@

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Faramondo* Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[FARAMOND]

A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1698-12-27

Dedicated to Ferdinando III de' Medici, Grand Prince of Tuscany

King Gustav of Bohemia had three children  Sven/Sueno, Adolph, and Rosamond. When he refused
to give the hand of his daughter to the king of the Swedes, war ensued. Faramond, the legendary king
of Franconia, played a decisive role in the final battle. Faramondo opened on 27 December 1698
(NV), the date of dedication of one version of the libretto.' Francesco Antonio Pistocchi sang in the
title role, with Anton Francesco Carli (Gustavo) and [Maria] Domenica Pini (Rosimonda).?**
Faramondo seems to have cemented relations between Zeno and the Florentine court. Apart from the
frequent presence of the Grand Prince in Venice, Zeno was in regular correspondence with Antonio
Magliabecchi in Florence from June 1698 onward concerning the dramatic initiatives of the Arcadians
and related matters. On 27 December he sent Magliabecchi a copy of this work with the comment, The
intrigues of the drama, which should have its first performance tonight, do not permit me to enjoy them
all by myself.** The text remained in use for the next half century. Handel's work of the same title
(HWV 39; 1738) was based on a 1720 revision of Zeno's text.

Score in A-Wn; arias in B-Bc

Listed as Galvani SGG 34; Bonlini 339; Groppo 343; Alm 461

Gl'amori tra gl'odi, Music by Mare' Antonio Ziani

ossia Ramiro in Norvegia
[Love IN THE MIDST OF HATRED, OR RAMIR IN NORWAY]

A dramma per musica Text by Marc' Antonio Remena!
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1699-01-10~
Without dedication

Against the background of the animosity between Ramir, the king of Denmark, and Effro, the king
of Sweden, intrigues involving Lamberta and Irene (disguised as Ardea) thaw royal animosities. Since
San Cassiano did not respond to the Arcadian mandate for reform, it is not surprising that G/'amori
contained a generic role for a comic servant (Nesso).

Despite the absence ofa dedication, the subject suggests that G/ amori (in which the names are fictional)
was intended for the visit of the prince of Denmark, who arrived in Venice on c. 7 January 1699. The
introduction to the libretto indicates that this production was arranged hastily from a text which had
been written at an earlier time for a performance which was deferred. As now constituted, the work
lacked its original merit and was beholden to the limitations of the site. Some arias were omitted
in the interests of brevity. Ziani's skills as a composer, in distinction to the restrictions of the situation,
were second to none.

256 Silvani cited French historians including Verdier and Monsignor de Mezeray de la Serre as his sources.
257 US-BEu (but not US-LAu 461).

258 A complete cast list is given in Saunders, Repertoire, p. 458. Both singers mentioned here would join the service of various members of
the Medici household over the coming years.

259 G/'imbrogli del dramma, di cui questa sera deve farsi la prima recita, non mi permettono di trattenermi di vantaggio seco... (Lettere
I, 24; see also 7, 10-24).

26 Facs. edn. with commentary by Carlo Vitali in DMV, ix.

6! Remena was from Verona.

26 These monarchs' names as given in Italian do not correspond to any historical figures.

fi

 1699
1699/2

ry

eX)

1699/3

m1

&
Oo

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 235

No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SCas 35; Bonlini 340; Groppo 344; Alm 462

Camilla, regina de' Volsci. Cf. 1698/5.

ll ripudio d'Ottavia Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[THE REPUDIATION OF OCTAVIA]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1699-02-13

Dedicated to Joseph Leopold?

The daughter of Claudius and Messalina, Octavia was married to Nero, who divorced her to marry
Poppea, the wife of the emperor Otho/Ottone. Octavia was falsely found guilty of treason and executed.
As the libretto depicts him, the reckless Nero was a student of playing the lyre, a dilettante of music,
[and] a friend of song, fantasy, vanity, and lasciviousness. The work opened with the coronation of
Tiridates, a pretender to the Armenian throne.

This second opera was first performed on 13 February 1699 (CO, NV). It was variously reported
to have been received with great applause (NV) and with maximum applause for the great machines
(M). Maria Domenica Pini sang in the title role, with Francesco Antonio Pistocchi (Nerone), Anna
Maria Torri (Poppea), and Gio. Battista Franceschini (Ottone).?

Arias in B-Be; I-Bsp

Listed as Galvani SGG 35; Bonlini 341; Groppo 345; Alm 463

La fortezza al cimento Music by Giuseppe Aldrovandini?
[FORTITUDE AT RISK]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1699-02-14

Dedicated to Eugene, Prince of Savoy

In this treatment of history, Nero defeated Mithridates and imprisoned his wife and daughter but then
was killed. La fortezza opened on 14 February 1699 (CO, M), which was also the date of dedication
of its libretto. It may have been one of the newly opened operas which was receiving universal
applause with a great concourse on the 21st (NV). A setting of the same text, possibly Aldrovandini's,
was performed with an added comic role, in Florence during Carnival 1703. Another setting, by Francesco
Mancini, was given in Naples in 1721.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SSal 64; Bonlini 342; Groppo 346; Alm 464

?6 King of Hungary from 1687, king of Italy from 1690, and subsequent Holy Roman Emperor [1705-1711].

2 For a substantial discussion of // ripudio in relation to imperial politics, see Kettering, Neoplatonic Light.



65 Loc. cit. (... sommo applauso per le gran machine vi sono).

266 For a complete cast list, see Saunders, Repertoire, p. 458.

267 A Bolognese composer and a pupil of Perti.

268 This renowned military leader (1663-1736) and defender of the Empire had most recently been fighting in Transylvania. See the note for
Flavio Cuniberto (1687/3).

236

1699/4

Op,

1699/5

M1

ra)


fi

 1699a
1699/6

im

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Teodosio Music attributed to Mare' Antonio Ziani
[THEODOsIUS]

A dramma per musica Text (mis)attributed to Vincenzo Grimani?
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1699-02-14
Without dedicatee

This plot depicted the rivalry between the (Eastern) Roman and Persian empires. After the Roman
Arcadius was killed in battle, the victor, Isdegard, cunningly offered to look after his orphaned children,
Theodosius and Pulcheria. The offer was deceitful and confrontations continued. Teodosio apparently
opened on 14 February 1698 (CO). Although there is no dedicatee, it seems likely that the work was
intended for performance during the visit of the queen of Poland, who arrived on 18 January 1699 (M).
A public reception for her was held almost immediately. She was expected to remain for only two weeks
but may have stayed longer; she did not reach her next stop, Bologna, until 1 March.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SCas 36; Bonlini 343; Groppo 347; Alm 465

Milziade Music by Giovanni Maria Ruggieri
[MILTIADES]

A dramma per musica Text by Lotto Lotti
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Fat Week)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1699-02-25

Dedicated to Giovanni Battista, Count of Castelbarco

Miltiades, the Athenian general who defeated Darius at the battle of Marathon, here posed as a slave
who was ultimately betrothed to Darius's daughter, Roxane. The action took place in Persepolis. Milziade,
the last work to be produced within a regular sequence at SS. Giovanni e Paolo, can only have been
performed near the end of Carnival, since the libretto was dedicated on 24 February, two days before
Giovedi Grasso. The dedicatee, an envoy of the emperor to the duke of Mantua, had arrived in Venice
by the 7th (NV). Lotti explained in the dedication that this was not the work he intended as the second
of Carnival and he apologized for its deficiencies. He hoped that the music of Ruggieri, one of the
most accredited of his profession, would offset the work's defects.

Arias in I-CCc

Listed as Galvani SSGP 99; Bonlini 344; Groppo 348; Alm 466

Un costante valore vince ogni frode. Cf. Suppl. 7.

L'amar per virtt Music attributed to Antonio Draghi?!
[To LOVE FOR THE SAKE OF VIRTUE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Donato Cupeda?
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)

26 According to Alm (Catalog, p. 286, following NG), but discredited by Theophil Antonicek and Jennifer Williams Brown in NGDMM/2.
Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 134) may have initiated the uncertainty with his description of the text as a drama posthumo, che fu perfezzionato da
altri, [il quale] e parto d'una penna assai chiara per dignita, e per natale. Here the text has been adjusted for a passable performance.

270 Giovanni Battista (Johann Baptist), the count of Castelbarco, was now the imperial ambassador to the duchy of Mantua. After the collapse
of the duchy, he was to become its imperial administrator (1708-14). He was distantly related to the Gonzaga family and had been the leader
ofthe regiment of Bayreuth. The family seat lay between Verona and Trent. A Milanese branch of the family assembled an important collection
of violins in the late seventeenth century by the Amati, Guarneri, Stradavari, and [Jakob] Steiner enterprises.

27! With contributions by Leopold I.

2? Cupeda(c. 1661-1704) was a Neapolitan. The text for this work was derived from Bartolomeo de Rogatis, Historia della perdita e riacquisto
della Spagna occupata da' Mori (7 vols., Venice: Guerigli, 1689). Ivaldi (La rappresentazione, p. 362) calls attention to the debts of the
elaboration here to popular romances from the period 1656-96.

Oo

1699/7

i

OF-s8

1699/8

mM

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 237

With balli SORTING DATE: 1699-11-07
Dedicated to the Ladies of the Veneto

The establishment of Moorish rule in Spain upset the balance of power involving such other lands as
Arabia and Tunisia. This plot played on these new conflicts. It hinged on portraying Egilda, who was
really the daughter of Roderic/Rodrigo, the last king of the Goths, as the daughter of a North African

army commander. The work, situated in Cordova, had been given in Vienna on 30 June 1697.2

Although an opening had been announced for 3 November, this work actually had its premiere on

7 November 1699 (CO, M). A license to print the libretto had been issued on 29 October. Anna Maria
Battaglia, a Bolognese singer in the employ of the duke of Mantua, took the role of Egilda. Other members
of the cast named in the libretto were Oliviero Matraia (in the service of the viceroy of Sicily), Margherita
Raimondi (Merisbe) and Filippo Sandri (Arideno) from Verona, Carlo Campelli (Cratero) from Milan,
and Paolo Teodorovich (Consalvo), who was in the service of Cardinal Pallavicino.?

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SSal 65; Bonlini 345; Groppo 349; Alm 467

Rossane, imperatrice degli Assiri Music by multiple composers?
[ROXANE, EMPRESS OF THE ASSYRIANS]

A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With a ballo and cori SORTING DATE: 1699-11-22~

Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua

The orphaned Assyrian princess Roxane was courted by the Persian king Artabanos, who falsely
represented himselfas a widower. His wife, Argene, upon discovering his treachery, schemed for Roxane
to wed the Armenian prince Arsakes. The action took place in Babylonia.

Given that it was for the autumn season, Rossane is likely to have opened during the St. Martin's period
(11-28 November), following Sant' Angelo's example in recent years. The publisher's date on the title-
page is MDXIC. Bonlini noted that the libretto printed in 1700 (see 1700/6) was a reprint,' suggesting
a continuation of this production after Christmas.

Rossane had ten roles, an unusually large number at the time. Four allegorical figures (Venus, Love,
Delight, and Happiness) were also required. The staging was somewhat exotic in its calls for a royal
peacock and military instruments for a royal cavalcade (for which the dedicatee had a great enthusiasm;
see Suppl. Se). In the final scene a machine was pulled by an elephant.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SAng 41; Bonlini 346 (a); Groppo 350 (a); Alm 468

Il Paolo Emilio Music attributed to Pietro Romolo Pignatta
[PAULUS AEMILIUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Rossi*
Opened at the Teatro di Cannaregio SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1699-12-01

23 See Allacci, Drammaturgia, col. 42.

24 T-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 146, entry of 31 Ottobre 1699, f. 708r; see also entry of the following week, f. 717r.

275 None of these singers in this work appeared in a later opera at any Venetian theater. All were connected with venues in which Vincenzo
Grimani had some influence. Raimondi was the future wife of Tomaso Albinoni.

276 Probably including Antonio Caldara, who had been associated with the orchestra of this theater for many years and was in the employ of

the dedicatee.

27 Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 137) disputed the claim of a revival in 1700 and Groppo (MS, p. 143) accepted his reservations.

278 This Rossi was a Venetian.

238

OR

f

 1699b
1699/9

oo

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Dedicated to Anzolo Maria Priuli, N.V.

The Roman military leader Paulus Aemilius captured Crete and governed Macedonia in the first century
AD. Alexander, the son of Perseus, the king of Macedonia, spied on the Romans by pretending to be
a painter. He fell in love with Paulus's daughter, Tertia. A license to print the libretto was issued on
7 November 1699, but it did not open until the week ending on 5 December (CO). This was the last
work given at the Teatro di Cannaregio. The production moved to the new Teatro di San Fantin after
Christmas? and apparently ran through the winter in its new venue.

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani CR 6/SFan 1; Bonlini 347; Groppo 351; Alm 470

Carattacco. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Lucio Vero" Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[Lucius VERUS]

A dramma per musica Text derived from Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1699-12-26

Dedicated to Felipe Antonio Spinola Colonna, Duke of Sesto

Lucius Verus of Ephesos, where this work is situated, served as co-emperor with and later succeeded
Marcus Aurelius of Rome. The political relationship was solidified by Lucius's marriage to his
collaborator's daughter, Lucilla. Before the marriage was concluded, however, the Parthians waged
war on Rome. Lucius defeated their leader, Vologeses [191-208 AD], and fell in love with his widow
Berenice. A councillor for Marcus Aurelius demanded that Lucius choose between his promise to Lucilla
and his infatuation with Berenice.

A license to print the libretto was issued on 14 December 1699. Some libretti*' were dedicated on 26
December 1699, which was also the date of the first performance (M). The title-page was dated 1700.
Lucio was received with applause. Francesco de Grandis sang in the title role, with Maria Domenica
Pini (Berenice) and Filippo Scandalibene (Volgeso)."*

The text had been performed in an anonymous musical setting at Pratolino in September. It was billed
there as a commedia and given before Cardinal Francesco de' Medici.* The same text was the basis
for the production of // trionfo della costanza at the Cocomero (1709). In various permutations it was
extremely long-lived. Albinoni and Gasparini set it for other venues in 1713 and 1719 respectively.
Araya set it for Sant' Angelo as 1735/1. Revised towards mid-century by G. E. Luccarelli as Vologeso,
the text found new representations in the settings of Galuppi (1748), Sarti (1754), Bertoni (1757), Sacchini
(1764), Traetta (1774), and Martin y Soler (1783). Another derivative was Mattio Verazzi's Vologeso,
set by Jommelli (1766).

No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SGG 36; Bonlini 349; Groppo 353; Alm 473

281

2 Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 135. Groppo (MS, p. 140) adds that the libretto was not reprinted with the name of the new theater.

28 The Marquis Battista Spinola had been appointed General of the Galleys in Malta (Mercurio, report of 13 Decembre 1698, 2r).

28 E.g., US-BEu. Other copies of the libretto, such as I-Vcg 59A/40/3 and US-LAu461, contain no date of dedication. The title-pages say
MDCC at top and 1700 at bottom.

28 A complete cast list is given in Saunders, Repertoire, p. 458.
28 See R. L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 188.

1699/10

i



OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1690-99) 239

Il duello d'amore e di vendetta' Music attributed to Mare' Antonio Ziani
[THE DUEL OF LOVE AND REVENGE]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1699-12-27

Dedicated to Luis della Cerda y Aragona, Viceroy of Naples**

This fanciful treatment of Iberian history concerns the end of the Visigoths' reign but contrasts sharply
with David's text, set by Pollarolo as 1692/10. Roderic/Rodrigo, the last Gothic king to rule Spain,
seduced the young noblewoman Florinda with the promise of marriage. Upon the death of the ruler
Wittiza/Vitige, Roderic succeeded to the Spanish throne [710-711]. The future of Spain was thought
to depend upon the son to whom Florinda gave birth.** The action took place in Seville.

11 duello must have opened prior to 31 December 1699 because a report of 2 January 1700 said that
it was enjoying applause (M). The libretto had been dedicated on 26 December. On 16 January 1699
M.V. (M), it was said to be the best-attended work of the season. The cast-list given in the libretto
indicates the dominance of singers from the Mantuan court  Maria Landini (Elisena), Anna [Maria]
Battaglia (Climene), Margherita Raimondi (Florinda), and Filippo Sandri (Giuliano). The role of Rodrigo
was taken by Nicola Grimaldi (from the vice-regal chapel at Naples), who was appearing in his Venetian
debut. That of the son of Wittiza (Evanco) was sung by Oliviero Matraia from the vice-regal chapel
in Sicily. Paolo Teodorovich appeared in a minor role.

Ziani's work was given in Mantua in the spring of 1701. Silvani's text was adapted for Handel's first
Italian opera, now known as Rodrigo but first given with the title Vincer se stesso e la maggior vittoria
(HWV 5) for the Accademia degl'Infuocati, which met in the civic theater on the Via del Cocomero
(Florence) late in 1707. It was set as Li sdegni cangiati per amore (San Moise, 1725/4).

Arias in GB-Lpr (seconda')

Listed as Galvani SSal 66; Bonlini 348; Groppo 352; Alm 471, 472

24 Viceroy of Naples from 1695 to 1702, he was also the duke of Medina Coeli (Medinaceli).

285 The Mozarabic Chronicle (754) notes that the followers of Wittiza, considering Rodrigo a usurper, called in Muslim support.

286 Grimaldi's career lasted until c. 1730. The sobriquet Nicolino was humorous; caricatures show him to have been an imposing figure.

The 1700s: An Overview

he years 1700-1703 brought profound changes to
Ne northern Italy and adjacent parts of Europe, as the
War of Spanish Succession began. Initially, the
dispute involved only France and Austria, but eventually it
consumed most of the Continent and the British Isles. The
Venetian Republic maintained official neutrality, but several
early battles took place in the neighboring duchies of Mantua
and Modena. The Mantuan court took refuge in Monferrato.
The duke of Mantua, who sided with the French, became
an exile in Venice, where he died in 1708. Hostilities did
not cease until 1713.

The realities of war caused a purge of all theatrical
activities in Venice. The division between patrons sympa-
thetic to the French and those attuned to the Empire became
conspicuous as the war progressed. Performers could be
waylaid, sometimes for years, by the precarious nature of
travel. In compensation, Venetian opera was imitated in
ahost of venues. Even as that happened, the Great Northern
War, involving Sweden and Czarist Russia under Peter the
Great, served as a new stimulus to the theatrical imagination.
Librettists plumbed unfamiliar histories in search of new
subjects. To entertain audiences with fewer performers, the
staging of opera began to change. Prologues, cloud machines,
and the gods to populate them disappeared. Battle scenes
became passe except at San Giovanni Grisostomo. A new
theater, San Fantin, featured very young performers in low-
budget productions. It survived for the first twenty years of
the new century.

In this hobbled economy, the Grimani, on behalf of their
comedy house, San Samuele, contracted with the Vendramin,
who owned San Salvatore, to share resources and avoid direct
competition. One result was that San Salvatore ceased to
present operas, but so too did the Grimani's older opera-
house, SS. Giovanni e Paolo. Ina series of contracts written
between 1703 and 1708, prose comedies were back-handedly
prohibited at San Cassiano and Sant' Angelo over the next
twenty-five years! While Sant' Angelo had never presented
comedies, San Cassiano had alternated between modes of
entertainment. It was currently an opera house. San Moise,
which also had a history of alternation, was currently closed.

San Cassiano and Sant'Angelo promptly took their
revenge by introducing comic intermezzi into their operas

(1706). Comic roles in drammi per musica, which had been
in intermittent use for decades, were discouraged by the
Arcadian reformers promoted by the Grimani. San Giovanni
Grisostomo shunned this undignified innovation, but in the
remaining theaters, the familiar discourse of monarchs and
generals was now periodically interrupted by the petit-
bourgeois conversations of merchants and maids. San
Cassiano flourished.

Fewer libretti bore formal dedications. Dedicatees were
distinctly less eminent. Audiences became more anonymous.
Theater managers shifted their attention from pleasing a few
personaggi with large retinues to drawing audiences one by
one from a random population of visitors. In combination,
an influx of inexperienced impresari, a decline in the
presence of generous princes, and the recruitment of veteran
performers to venues elsewhere caused chaos. Annual
contracts remained in effect only in the larger houses. In the
smaller theaters, pay was dependent on the number of
performances. Aspects of productions thought to be pleasing
to female audiences  lavish costumes and elaborate balli
replaced those considered appropriate for male audiences
awe-inspiring sets and vigorous battle scenes. (Some male
commentators expressed disgust at this perceived
feminization of the genre.) Table 23 gives only the faintest
notion of how different opera in the first decade of the new
century was from that of the 1690s.

With adaptations, the successes of the Grimani at San
Giovanni Grisostomo culminated during this decade. The
political career of Vincenzo, who was the co-owner of the
theater and the effective manager of San Samuele, was
capped by his appointment (1708) as viceroy of Naples.
(Service to a foreign monarch also resulted in his exclusion
from the Venetian nobility.) Grimani's contacts with
Neapolitan performers led to an invitation to Alessandro
Scarlatti for Carnival 1706-07 and may have paved the way
for Handel's presence at San Giovanni in 1709-10. Pollarolo
and Lotti were San Giovanni's main composers. Ambassa-
dors from the Empire and its allies as well as from the Papal
States were instrumental in procuring the services of many
new singers. The glory years began to fade after Grimani's
death in 1710. San Giovanni's decline was accelerated by
the death of Gio. Carlo Grimani in 1714.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09)

241

304

Sant'Angelo
San Cassiano

San Fantin

@ San Gio. Grisostomo
GSS. Gio. e Paolo

@ San Moise
@ San Salvatore

TABLE 23. Productions by theater, 1690s vs. 1700s.

The changing mix of theatrical venues, musicians, and
audiences conspired to spread opera over most of the autumn.
There was now significant growth in the St. Luke's period
at the expense of the St. Stephen's. The number of operas
given during the formal Carnival period remained steady.
A few works were given exclusively for the last days of
Carnival. Sant' Angelo and San Cassiano, which were the
most active theaters of the decade, operated in both the
autumn and winter periods. San Fantin functioned sporadi-
cally from the margins of autumn through Carnival.

Theaters hosted an increasingly diverse mixture of
Bolognese singers, Florentine patrons, and figures of stature
in the Empire. Allegiances between specific duchies and
houses came apart as the duchies themselves collapsed. King
Frederick IV of Denmark (1708-09), the most prestigious
visitor of the decade, spread his largesse over the three
principal houses and the Gran Ridotto.

@ Other

Gasparini and Albinoni, who were the among the most
active composers of the decade, worked mainly at San
Cassiano. Compared to the 1690s, the number of operas (92)
increased, but this reflected increased turnover. Embassies
increasingly presented private entertainments to insulate
themselves from the problems of public theaters. Source
survival dropped precipitously: only a dozen operas of the
decade are fully preserved.

War was a strong stimulus to the circulation of news,
but it frequently disrupted their delivery. The mercuri and
the legate's records remain valuable sources, but each has
some lapses. Records for 1701 are missing for the first.
Relevant information is skimpy for 1706 in the second.
Scribes were consumed by reporting battlefield hostilities
for long stretches of the decade. The upheavals of comedy
troupes are well documented in voluminous correspondence
preserved in Mantua.

The 1700s: Chronology

1700/1 L'oracolo in sogno
[THE ORACLE WHO APPEARED IN A DREAM]
A dramma per musica
im Performed at Sant' Angelo

With balli and possibly with Lesba e Bleso!

Music by Antonio Caldara (1), Antonio Quintavalle (2),
Carlo Francesco Pollarolo (3)
Text by Francesco Silvani
SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
SORTING DATE: 1700-01-13~

' Cited in Groppo MS, p. 153, by way of back reference (perhaps spurious) from 1706/1. For an account of comic intermezzi in general see
Suppl. 4a. (The female role is the first title element in all citations for two-voice intermezzi.)

242 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Dedicated to Prince Karl, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel?

Op

This work focuses on military engagements involving Bohemian, English, and Scandinavian forces,

and particularly on the conflict between Boleslav of Bohemia and Berenice of Denmark.' A license

to print the libretto was issued on 6 January 1700. The libretto (the first in which dancers were identified

by name) was dedicated on 11 January, and the work was in progress by the 16th (BG).

Ov L'oracolo had been given in Mantua on 6 June 1699, and it is noted in the libretto that Silvani and five
of the singers in the Venetian production (Margherita Durastante,> Maria Antonia Zini, Catterina
Romagnola, Giuseppe Maria Segni, and Giovanni Antonio Vendetta) were employed in Mantua. One
singer, Francesca Margarita de Lepine, and the ballet master, Michiel Dalmas, were French. One week
prior to the Mantuan performance, Caldara had been appointed maestro of both the chapel and the court
theater. His appointment stated that in our opinion the virtues of Antonio Caldara in the profession
of counterpoint, singing, and ornamentation [passeggiare], besides [in playing] the cembalo and diverse
kinds of instruments, is singular.

A Score in CS-K

Listed as Galvani SAng 42; Bonlini 350; Groppo 354; Alm 474

1700/2 Il colore fa la regina Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[HER COLOR IDENTIFIES THE QUEEN]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
i Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1700-01-30
& Dedicated to Georg Friedrich, Margrave of Brandenburg

The axis of mistaken identity has shifted here from gender to ethnicity and race; the plot is fictitious.
The title seems to have been an afterthought; the libretto was originally published without a title.

 I colore was first performed on 30 January 1700 (CO, M, NV). A license to print the libretto had been
issued on 25 January 1700. Among the attendees were Alexander and Constantine Sobieski.

y-39 The work overflows with elements of exoticism. It carefully delineates different beliefs in China, where
astrology flourished, and India, where elephants roamed at will and a king could change the skin-color
of his subjects from black to white. It featured a monster twice the size of an ordinary elephant,
as well as fabulous costumes and jewels, a plain filled with silver columns, and a palace with a golden
vine. To proclaim it a scenic fantasy was not an exaggeration. The opening scene took place in
Cambodia [sic], where the sun was rising over the River Ganges.'

> Apparently Landgrave Karl (1654-1730) of Hesse-Kassel, who was married to Marie Anne de Courlande (1653-1711). The third of their
fourteen children was Prince Karl (1680-1702). An unnamed Hessian prince had arrived around the start of the year; a second arrived on the
6th (NV). The dedicatee was in town until the 25th (M).

> Perhaps loosely based on Baltic and North Sea history of c. 1000 AD. Of the four Boleslavs who ruled in the eleventh century, Boleslav
1(The Intrepid, 992-1025) is the most probable subject for this story. Sven I of Denmark [1000-1014] was concurrently King Swein of England
during the final year of his second reign (his widow's real name was Sigrid). The mixture of nationalities would have suited the rulers of Hesse-
Kassel, whose own family-tree was more mixed than most.

* Silvani's libretto indicates that as performed in Venice, the work was an abridged version of one given the previous summer for the duke
of Mantua.

* Durastante would have been only fourteen years old in 1700 (Kirkendale, Handel with Ruspoli, p. 304).
 See Besutti, La corte, p. 83, citing -MAas, AG, Mandati, Busta 61, vol. 112/2, f. 21.

7 The absence ofa single cultural tradition suggests a possible, if tenuous, link between // colore and an anonymous Scenario del moro della
bianca fe, which formed the basis ofa comedy given during Carnival 1694 in the Seminario Romano, Rome. The Roman performance included
a prologue and two intermedi involving balli. As well as a master of balli, a master of salto a cavallo was also engaged (Sartori 21115).

5 It is cited under the title // color fa la regina etiopica in CO.

 Sunrise over the Ganges was a trope in the Italian secular vocal repertory. Examples include Sigismondo dall' India's madrigal Nasce dal
Gange and Benedetto Marcello's cantata Sorge dall' Gange.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 243

RO During the opening performance, the lead singer Francesco de Grandis (Cecchino) injured his leg
when he fell into a hole in the set. He was carried on a chair for the remainder of the evening. The opera
was not repeated, as originally envisioned, on the 31st; it reopened on Tuesday, the 2nd of February
(M). Despite the initial disruption, the work enjoyed an incredible attendance with great applause
in the following week, when the dedicatee presented the theater with a diamond worth 112 ongarid'oro
(M). Audiences were enthusiastic about the subject, the most beautiful scenery, and the extravagant
machines (CO). De Grandis's performance (as Adelasio) was greatly applauded during the week of
13-20 February (M). The cast also featured Nicola Tricarico (Tassilo), Stefano Romani (Vitegio), and
Anna Maria Torri (Gelida).'

A Score in CS-K; arias in GB-Lprivate
Listed as Galvani SGG 37; Bonlini 352; Groppo 356; Alm 475

 1700a Il giudicio di Paride sul monte Ida. Cf. Suppl. 7a.
1700/3 La pace generosa Music attributed to Marc' Antonio Ziani
[THE GENEROUS PEACE]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
i Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1700-02-10
& Dedicated to Charles Henri of Lorraine"

Revisiting the Roman occupation of the Rhineland in the first century AD, Germanicus (see Germanico
sul Reno, 1676/1), the adopted son of his uncle Tiberius, rescued Segestes from the German prince
Arminius.' In this account some of the interest was invested in the role of Ismene, the wife of Arminius
and daughter of Segestes.

 The libretto for La pace was dedicated on 10 February 1700, the date of the premiere (CO, M). A license
to print the libretto had been issued on 30 January 1700. At its premiere, which was attended by the
duke of Mantua, the performance of Nicola Grimaldi (Nicolino, singing as Arminio) was greatly
applauded (M). The work itself had mixed reviews, ranging from its having brought satisfaction (CO)
to its having received little applause (NV). Four of the singers were from the Mantuan court, although
Grimaldi was from the Chapel Royal. Oliviero Matraia (Germanico) was from the vice-regal court in
Naples.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SSal 67; Bonlini 353; Groppo 357; Alm 477

 1700b Il vanto d'amore. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
1700/4 La Nicopoli Music by Bernardo Borgognini
[NICOPOLIs]
A dramma musicale Text by Francesco Rossi
i Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1700-10-23~

' Despite the lavish attention given to descriptions of sets, San Giovanni did not yet give cast lists for its works. Apart from the news-sheets
cited, singer identifications for the theater during this decade can be found in Termini, Pollarolo, and Saunders, Repertoire, pp. 459-64.
Both rely mainly on Caffi's Appunti.

"' Charles Henri de Lorraine-Vaudemont (1642-1723), a knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece (1675), was now the governor-general of
Lombardy (on behalf of the Spanish throne). He played a critical role in the French negotiations over the succession of the duchy of Mantua.
This extended to his arranging the remarriage of Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, the duke of Mantua, to his own wife's step-sister, Suzanne Henriette
d'Elboeuf (1686-1710). The Mantuan duke's holdings in Casale Monferrato, which had been occupied by troops of Louis XIV since 1682,
were soon ceded to the duchy of Lorraine. An envoy of the duke of Lorraine was permanently resident in Venice (I- Vas, RC, Busta 592, letter
of 18 gennaro 1699 M.V.). In 1703 Charles Henri was the dedicatee of JI trionfo della costanza, a comedy given with music and a Mantuan
cast in Milan under the Venetian impresario Giacomo Cipriotti.

" The historical framework is used in Corradi's libretto for Germanico sul Reno (1676/1).

244 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

& Dedicated to Antonio Ottoboni, Nob. Ven."?

In Roman history of the second century BC, the dictator Sulla persuaded Bocchus, the king of Numidia,
to hand the Roman prince Jugurtha over to Marius, resulting in the execution of Jugurtha. In this account,
ostensibly based on Plutarch, the Roman courtesan Nicopole plays a decisive role.'*

O@ This first work to be fully produced at the teatro domestico San Fantin had its premiere between 23
and 30 October 1700 (M).' The production was cited for two excellent voices  one a woman's and
one a castrato's (due buonissime voci d'una donna et d'un castrato). The theater became known
for its low-priced tickets.' The libretto itself called attention to the youth of the singers, the straitened
circumstances of the production, and the fact that it was being given in a private house. Apparently,
this was an experimental venture with little forethought given to the establishment of a permanent theater.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SFan 2; Bonlini 354; Groppo 358; Alm 478

1700/5 L'Aristeo Music by Antonio Pollarolo''
[ARISTAIOS]
A dramma per musica Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1700-11-12~
& Dedicated to Felipe [Antonio] Spinola Colonna'*

In Greek mythology, Aristaios, a Thracian prince, was associated with hunting and divination. In this
account, he wanted to determine whether Doriclea, the Theban princess whom his father wished him
to marry, was as beautiful and virtuous as she was said to be. While en route with a letter of introduction,
he was accosted by bandits (masnadieri) whose leader presented himself in Thebes as the intended
of Doriclea.

oo L'Aristeo was first performed in public between 6 and 13 November 1700. On the 13th it was reported
(M) that the opening occurred in addition to many performances given for a low admission fee in
different houses of this city.' Three of the singers in the San Cassiano performance (including Antonio
Giustachini, who sang in the title role) were from the Mantuan court. One was from Florence and another
from the court of Brunswick. Antonio Ristorini, who was later to become a celebrated interpreter of
comic intermezzi at this theater, sang in the role of Doriclea's father, Evander.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani Cas 37; Bonlini 355; Groppo 359; Alm 479

1700/6 Rossane, imperatrice degli Assiri Music by multiple composers
[ROXANE, EMPRESS OF THE ASSYRIANS]

A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli

i Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)

'3 One of the nephews of the late pope Alexander VIII (1688-90). He was appointed a procurator in 1689.
'* The background of the plot sounds suspiciously like the first (suppressed) version of // Demone amante (1685/11).

'S Early references to San Fantin always denigrated it linguistically by labeling it privato or domestico or by calling ita semiteatro. The evidence
of lawsuits and documentary accounts uniformly suggests that, like theaters labeled public, it charged admission, though at a modest rate.

' Pallade veneta, pp. 263, 267 (1710, 1711).

"7 Anexplanatory note in the libretto says of this composer that in his musical compositions he imitates very well [the style of] his great father.
Antonio Pollarolo was a son (1676-1746) of Carlo Francesco Pollarolo.

'8 The duke of Sesto. It may have been during this stay in Venice that he took the Paduan violinist Giacomo Facco, who was in the orchestra
of San Cassiano, into his service. Facco followed his employer to Naples, Sicily (1707-1713), and Madrid (from 1713) and composed cantatas
for the first venue, operas for the second, and concerti for the third. Facco died in 1753.

'Si e principiata la recita dell' opera musicale nel Theatro di S. Cassano [sic] intitolata L 'Aristeo oltre molte particolari recite da buon mercato,
che si rappresentano in diverse case di questa citta. See I-Vnm, Cod. It. VI-477 (= 12121) 1699/1700 [i.e., 1700], entry by date.

OB

1700/7

i



@E

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 245

With cori SORTING DATE: 1700-11-12~
Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo, Duke of Mantua

This revival of 1699/7, signaled by a libretto with the publication date MDCC, can only have been
accommodated during the St. Martin's season of 1700 (i.e., from November 12th to 27th). It lacked
the balli and other special features of the original production. On 2 November 1700 Vettor Grimani
signed a pact with Francesco Santorini to manage the theater, and, if staged, this would have been the
first production under the new administration. Santorini continued in the same position for two years.
No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani Ang 41; Bonlini 346 (b); Groppo 350 (b); Alm 469

II delirio comune Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo

per l'incostanza dei geni"
[DELIRIUM SHARED ON ACCOUNT OF FICKLE SPIRITS]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1700-12-11
Without dedicatee

The characters of // delirio were derived loosely from Greek mythology, although the concept of genius
(here defined as an inborn spirit that keeps persons and groups alive) was said to be Roman. // delirio
was first performed on 11 December 1700 (BG). The title-page is dated 1701; the libretto is signed
December 1700. The work's reception, noted by mere applause, was unenthusiastic. Gio. Battista
Barbaretti (Erostrato), Gio. Battista Roberti (Leonida), and Viena Mellini (Drosilla) were newcomers
to San Giovanni Grisostomo, but the other singers (de Grandis, Ballarini, Scarabelli, and Cabella) were
all veterans of its stage.

The first battles of the War of the Spanish Succession had begun in November. Although Venice was
officially neutral, it responded carefully to the growing sense of danger from all sides. Vincenzo Grimani,
the co-owner of San Giovanni Grisostomo, was one of three appointees (on 12 December) to the newly
formed (but unrelated) post of Inquisitor for the Peloponnese. The libretto offers evidence of the
financial difficulties of the times: unadorned type is substituted for the customary graphic design of
the title-page. In the absence ofa dedication, a short essay on intentions is given. The title and elements
of the depiction of the May Dance shown on the frontispiece seem to have been drawn by hand.
No musical sources known

Listed as Galvani SGG 38; Bonlini 356; Groppo 360; Wiel 2; Alm 480

? Sartori 20148 = 1699/7; Sartori 21049 = 1700/6. Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 137) and Groppo (MS, p. 143) claimed that there was no second
production of this work. That could have been the case if the dedicatee was prevented by the deteriorating political situation in Mantua from
making an intended trip to Venice, but it is apparent that a production was prepared.

2\ The original pact was cited retrospectively in I-Vas, Giudice de' Forestier, Busta 73, entry of 6 Febraro 1703 [M.V.]. (The Giudice de' Forestier
was a special court for disputes in which one or more parties [in this case Santorini] was not a Venetian.)

 This was the first libretto for San Giovanni Grisostomo which lacked a dedicatee. It is likely that one was intended, but the siege of Mantua
in the preceding month may have thwarted the original plan.

3 1-Fas, Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5903, Lettera N. 108 from Francesco Ballerini [Ballarini], dated 11 December 1700 (citation kindly provided
by Olga Termini), suggests that the opening was on the 12th.

4 A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1701, entry of 18 Decembre 1700: Domenica mattina furono prescienlti nel Maggior Seren. Conseglio i Sig. Eccell. Vincenzo
Grimani, Angiolo Morosini, e Giacomo Minio, per passare con titolo d'Inquisitori nel Regno di Morea...

246 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Wes y % e ILLUSTRATION 15. The dance of nymphs and
& :

shepherds (called the May Dance in the libretto)
as depicted in Noris's libretto for Pollarolo's //
delirio comune (1700/7). The work opened at San
Giovanni Grisostomo in December. The substitu-
tion of this drawing for the incisions showing his-
torical subjects, which were typical for San
Giovanni Grisostomo, is indicative of the finan-
. cial constraints of the time. (UCLA Libretto 480.)

1700/8 Diomede punito da Alcide' Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[DIOMEDES PUNISHED BY ALKIDES]

A dramma [musicale] Text by Aurelio Aureli

ry Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)

With ballo SORTING DATE: 1700-12-12

 In Greek mythology, Hercules fed the wicked Thracian king Diomedes to his man-eating mares. This

anterior account concentrates on how Diomedes' capture of the Spartan princess Harpalike/Arpalice
thwarted her intended meeting with her husband, Evander. Diomede was first performed on 12 December
1700 (BG). The production was apparently revived late in January, when it was seen by Joseph Addison.

?5 Alcide (Alcides, Alkides) was a patronymic for Hercules or one of his descendants. Although the name Alcide is used in this title, the
corresponding role in the opera was assigned to Ercole [Hercules].

6 The libretto asserts that she was Spartan, but she is more commonly described as Thracian.

27 Addison's brief stay in Venice occurred in early in 1701. Extensive quotation of Addison's Remarks on Several Parts of Italy &c. in the
years 1701, 1702, 1703 (London: Jacob Tonson, 1705, with more than a dozen reprints through 1767) has recently been noted in the Mercure
of 1724 (Selfridge-Field, Addison, p. 191). Addison may have been with a delegation of severall English Gentlemen. (plus the countess
of Salisbury; GB-Lpro, SPV, Ser. 99, Box 57, Broughton to Mr. Vernon, Whitehall, 21 January 1700/1) who had arrived in recent days.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 247

Five of the eight singers in Diomede were from Mantua.* The remaining members of the cast were
from Ferrara (Filippo Balestra), Florence (Maria Domenica Marini), and Genoa (Giulio Rizzi).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Galvani SAng 43; Bonlini 357; Groppo 361; Wiel 5; Alm 481

1701/1 Griselda Music attributed to Antonio Pollarolo
[GRISELDA]
A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno
r1 Given at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1701-01-04
x Dedicated to Antonio Ballarini

The dedication traces the lineage of this pastoral story  in which the Sicilian baron Walter/Gualtiero
fell in love the shepherdess Griselda  to Boccaccio, Petrarch, Iacopo Filippo Foresti, Paolo Mazzi,
Ascanio Massimo, and Carlo Maria Maggi." The librettist claims to have constructed his characters
to be of middling virtue (mezzana virtit).

<7) Griselda opened on 4 January 1701 (CO), when it was received with much satisfaction (BG). One
libretto, Sartori 12515, also carries the printer's date 1701.? The Venetian production would have
coincided with the start of the blockade of Mantua, where there was soon a health crisis. The paucity
of openings in both 1701 and 1702 attests to the growing number of unfavorable circumstances.
In the previous absence of a definitive date for this work, an unusually long trail of vague indicators
has generated many speculations about its performance. The only confirmation of the existence of a
Venetian version of Griselda was for a long time that found ina letter of 1703 from its librettist, Apostolo
Zeno. Dated 24 February 1702 M.V., the letter expressed Zeno's infinite delight over the comic scenes
added by Girolamo Gigli for the Florentine production then in progress. A manuscript note ina libretto
from that production said that the work (by Albinoni and Zeno) had been given at San Cassiano in Venice
in 1702.4 Several of the singers in the Florentine production were later active in Venice.*>

o Zeno's text offered the basis of numerous productions through the 1730s, and it generated a long trail
of settings up to the end of century. Albinoni's setting was also given in Palermo and Verona. Other

8 But three donne (Laura Valetta, Angela Laschi, and Vittoria Deluga) were Bolognese in the duke's employ. The other two (Luigi Durelli
and Michelangelo Pomelli) were uomini.

 Minister of the duke of Modena.

 The text was reset by Orlandini in 1720. There is no historical confirmation of the legend which held that the baron (Gualtiero Caltagirone,
who played a role in the thirteenth-century War of the Sicilian Vespers) was the son of Frederick II of Sicily.

3! Muratori, who was active in Modena, collected the works of Maggi and published them (posthumously) in 1700.

 The dedication to Ballarini, the minister of the duke of Modena, would have excluded the possibility that Griselda was given in Venice
later than the close of Carnival 1702, because Modena was thereafter (August 1702 to February 1707) occupied by French forces.

3 Zeno (Lettere, i, 66), in Venice to Anton Francesco Marmi in Florence on 24 Febbrajo 1702 M.V., writes, Ho ricevuto cosi tardi I' ordinario
passato i due drammi, che la bonta di V. S. Illustrissima si e compiaciuta inviarmi, che non sono stato in tempo dipoterle rendere quelle grazie,
delle quali le era tenuto, e che presentemente col pid vivo sentimento dl cuore le rendo. Ho letta [sic] la Griselda, e mi sono infinitamente
piaciuti i ridicoli, che con tanta saviezza il Sig. Gigli vi ha aggiunti. I cangiamenti che per entro vi si son fatti, sono di si piccola conseguenza,
che non mi hanno dato fastidio, ne me |'han fatta parer diversa da quella, ch'io prima la pubblicai. Ho godimento che costi piaccia, dove per
altro non sogliono piacere se non le cose ottime: non gia che io creda esser tale il mio dramma, ma tale il faranno parere e la bonta della musica
fatta dal Sig. Albinoni, dame oltremodo stimato, e la virth degli attori. Non so se cosi le sara piaciuto il mio Venceslao, che qui certamente
ha riscossi pil applausi di quelli che meritava.

34 See R. T. and L. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 194. Arias survive in I-Mb. Albinoni played the violin in the performance. When Griselda
was performed in Naples in 1706, it was recalled (from the 1703 libretto) that Albinoni was ottimo non solo suonatore di violino, che
contrapuntista. The contrascenes provided by Girolamo Gigli for the Florentine production were published in an altered version more than
fifty years later (1759) as a farce with the title La vecchia innamorata. Elpino also had a role in Aminta, a drama regio-pastorale given in
Florence on 15 October 1703 with music by Albinoni.

35 No cast members are identified in the Venetian libretto.

248 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

settings followed through that of Paer (Dresden, 1800), and the story itself remained popular throughout
the nineteenth century.

A Arias in -MC
Listed as Bonlini 358; Groppo 362; Wiel 3; Alm 482

1701/2 Il Pericle in Samo Music by multiple composers
[PERIKLES IN SAMOS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Rossi
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1701-01-08~
a Dedicated to Lorenzo Verzusio Beretti-Landi*
o The Athenian general Perikles, a champion of democracy, defended his city against the Spartans in

the Peloponnesian wars (fourth century BC). This account concentrates on his personal life: two legitimate
sons died in a plague, but a son (also Pericles) born to his mistress Aspasia (who in this account had
been raped by the wicked prince Doralbos of Samos; in others she was a prostitute) survived. The action
depicted here was said to take place in Algeria. Pericle was written for the [still private] teatro domestico
of San Fantin and may have opened around the start of Carnival (8 January). The publisher's date on
the lower title-page is given as 1701. M.V. In this case the designation M.V. appears to be in
error, since Addison, who visited Venice in 1701, attended a performance.** Addison criticized the
acting for its lack of conviction but said nothing about the music.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 359; Groppo 363; Wiel 6; Alm 483

1701/3 Catone uticense Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[CATO OF UTICA]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1701-01-13
& Dedicated to Gaetano Cesarini

The librettist says he set out to weigh the worlds of joy and sorrow against one another. His subject,
Marcus Porcius Cato (Francesco Ballarini), who was noted for his high principles, committed suicide
rather than accept a pardon from Julius Caesar (Francesco de Grandis). Caesar married Cato's daughter,
Flaminia (Diamante Maria Scarabelli). For its time, Catone included a large number of allegorical figures
 Fortune, Fate, Glory, War, the Spirit (Genio) of Rome, and Mercury.

> Then secretary and councillor to the duke of Mantua. The occupation of the duchy (November 1700) drove a wedge between the duke, who
sided with the French, and Beretti-Landi, who sided with the Spanish. Beretti-Landi (sometimes called simply Beretti) was given a pension
of 300 doppie and the title of Count of Calatrava by 29 July 1702. By 1704 he was serving the Spanish throne in the Swiss cantons, where
he allied himself with Charles Henri of Lorraine. He is specifically acknowledged in the libretto as the mecenate di questo drama. It was
hoped that the work would temper his misfortunes. In 1711 the Princess of Santo Buono (wife of the Spanish ambassador) said that Beretti-Landi
would not return to Venice (I-Vas, RC, Busta 592, Fasc. Cremona 1711, letter of 23 Octobre 1711). He ended his career (1716-21) as Spain's
ambassador to the Netherlands.

> The seasonal designation at the top says that the work was for I'anno 1701. According to the Mercurio, nothing new had opened through
the 28th, but the time-frame may refer only to the currently closing week, since the statement is clearly in error for a longer retrospective period.

** It is hard to imagine that M.V. was given erroneously, but easy to imagine that the intention was to write 1700 M.V. Addison's
correspondence established the year of his visit. However, the 1700-01 season marked a low ebb in opera productions. lit is not inconceivable
that some of this season's failures were replayed in 1701-02. Similar apparent contradictions of date pertain to Catone uticense (1701/3).

 Selfridge-Field, Addison, pp. 191 ff.

* Prince of Genzano, a small holding outside Rome with pre-Roman origins.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 249

 Catone opened on the 13th, although some revised copies of the libretto were dedicated on the 16th.*!
It encounter[ed] major applause (BG). Addison attended a performance late in January.

@ _&  Addison's impressions of Catone were published in his travel diary (1705) and were reprinted
anonymously in French translation in the December 1724 issue of Le Mercure galant. He objected to
the lack of fidelity to classical models in the action and scenery. More positive comments on scenery
dominated a later account by Riccoboni, who wrote that as an entertainment was being prepared for
Caesar and his army, a globe came forward to the sound of trumpets and other instruments. Reaching
Caesar, it opened to reveal the three continents and their riches  gold, jewels, and metals of all
colors. It also contained a great number of musicians. In the dance of the soldiers which Addison
describes, the participants were disguised as shepherds and wore garlands of poppies around their necks.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 361; Groppo 365; Wiel 1; Alm 485

1701/4 L'inganno innocente Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[THE INNOCENT TRICK]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
i Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1701-01-17
@ Dedicated to Antonio Mutoni*
Oor In this tale from the eighth-century Arabic invasion of the Iberian peninsula, Roderic, the young Gothic

king of Granada, disguised himself as a woman to evade Algerian sailors. He was nonetheless captured
and taken to King Amurat, who fell in love with his alter ego. Queen Fatima, detecting his true gender,
fell in love with him. He in turn fell in love with their daughter, the princess Clymene. A license to
print the libretto was issued on 12 January 1701, and it was dedicated on the 16th. An opening on the
17th was anticipated (CO). Although L 'inganno was revived in Vicenza in 1717 and at San Cassiano
as 1725/10, it cannot have been a success in 1701 because Diomede (1700/8) was soon reinstated.
A Arias in B-Br
Listed as Bonlini 360; Groppo 364; Wiel 4; Alm 484

1701la Andromeda. Cf. Suppl. 7.
1701/5 L'Orfeo" Music (newly) attributed to Nicola Giglio
[ORPHEUS]
An opera pastorale Text attributed to Andrea Minelli
im Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Given with balli SORTING DATE: 1701-11-29~

' The year at first appears to be old-style because there ofa license to print the libretto dated 12 January 1702. Although it could signal a revised
version that ran in the following year, this seems dubious because in 1702 only comedies were running prior to 4 February (M). One report
holds that San Giovanni Grisostomo was closed throughout the 1702 season (I-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1584, letter of Lorenzo
Zanchi dated 29 Gennaro 1701 M.V.)

 A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1701, entry of 15 Genaro, suggests that the production had opened on the 8th, but it is possible that words were accidentally
omitted in the transcription ...andata la sera [di giovedil....

* Selfridge-Field, Addison, pp. 189ff.

 Riccoboni, Histoire, p. 45, as quoted in Lockman, Reflections, p. ix. The globe seemed to take its cue from the staging of La divisione
del mondo (San Salvatore) some 35 years earlier.

5 A Venetian general.

 Giglio's role is stated to have been that of compositore della musica in the document cited in the following note.

250 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

& Dedicated to Massimiliano Godi*'

L'Orfeo portrayed Orpheus and Eurydice as happy earthlings, Orion pursuing Diana, Aristaios longing
for Eurydice, and Cupid and Pluto trying to influence Fate. The first two acts featured a garden and
the wooded bank of a stream, while the third featured a hunt. At the end of the work all the nymphs
and shepherds became stars, while the goddess Diana was transformed into the moon. The author said
his intent was to imitate the simple language of shepherds in this short pastoral work, which had
previously been given in Rovigo as Le finezze d'amore (1698); under this title it was revived in Venice
as 1703/7.

OGLE Evidence from notary's records suggests that Orfeo was in production by 29 November 1701. Apparently
the sole offering of San Fantin throughout the 1701-02 season, it was still running on 11 February 1702,
when it was enjoying a great concourse (BG). The librettist praised the sweetness of harmony and
the beautiful execution [manieri'] of the performers. This work was more ambitious than most at
San Fantin but was still relatively short. A reference to the doge's having prohibited performances at
San Fantin in November 1701*? may only reflect the enforcement of a closure during Advent, which
would have been lifted after Christmas.* However, lack of underwriting for the troupe of performers
may have been the main motive for the prohibition.*!

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 364; Groppo 368; Wiel 10; Alm 490

 1702a Pastoral for Epiphany. Cf. Suppl. 9.
 1702b Elpino. Cf. Suppl. 7.

1702/1 L'arte in gara con l'arte Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[ONE DECEPTION IN CONFLICT WITH ANOTHER]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1702-02-04
& Without dedicateeTM

Like so many other Venetian opera plots of the time, this one involved concealed identities. The historical
Manfred, an illegitimate son of the half-German, half-Sicilian Frederick II, continued Staufen rule in
Sicily after his father's death in 1250. At first the lineage was continued by Manfred's son Conradin.
It was terminated by his death (1266) and by that of his own son, Frederick Conradin (1268). In this
account Manfred believed Ruggiero to be his son, but Manfred's actual son was disguised as William,
the gardener.

*7 A nobleman from Vicenza.
* Its dedicatee there had been the duke of Mantua.

* A petition signed on 6 Novembre 1710 by Pietro Taneschi [Ianeschi] (I-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Attilio Centon, Busta 3903) reiterated
one of 29 Novembre 1701, in which the doge did not permit in teatro alcuno e particolarmente in quello di S. Fantino la recita de drami per
sostenire la parte con troppa proclive fide. ... An extensive list of plaintiffs, all apparent parties involved in the earlier production, was headed
by P. Nicola Giglio come coratador e come compositore della Musica, Francesco Rossi come coratador [ = impresario], [and] Carlo Platti
e Andrea de Bona, compagni del negotio deg!' habiti. It continued with the singers Malgarita Gaspari and her brother Antonio, Iseppo [Giuseppe]
Bassani, Corona Ferrari, Marta Fantini, Betta Vespetiani, Francesco Pollani, and Pre. Andrea Gavazzi [nature of participation undetermined].
The instrumentalists were the Rev. D. Battista e Antonio Brodegato, Nadalin della Viola, and Giacomo [Taneschi?] dal Violon. Francesco
Tasso conzador was listed as a patron of the theater.

* To avoid an opening during Advent, the last practical date for a first performance would have been the 26th. While an earlier date would
have better suited the pastoral theme, the title-page is dated 1702.

5' In particular, documents in I-Vas, Sezione Notarile. Atti Attilio Centon, Busta 3903, indicate that underwriting was secured on the 29th
from Gerolamo Muraro [a naval captain].

* The patronage of Ferdinand Carlo might have been anticipated, but the blockade of his duchy kept him at home (M). However, many other
possible audiences can be imagined. Groppo (MS, p. 144) reports that there were four editions of the libretto.



1702/2

im

&
Ow

1702/3

ry

oO 

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 251

L'arte in gara was first performed on 4 (M) or 5 (CO) February 1702 (the 4th was the opening day
of Carnival). On the 11th Z arte was enjoying a great concourse (BG). A license to print the libretto
had been issued on 29 January 1702. The production had been anticipated with high expectations because
of the novelty of the subject, the poetry of Abbot Silvani, and the music of Albinoni (PV).

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 362; Groppo 366; Wiel 8; Alm 486, 487, 488

La vittoria nella costanza Music by Giuseppe Boniventi
[VICTORY IN CONSTANCY]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco PassariniTM
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1702-02-05

Dedicated to Felipe Antonio Spinola Colonna

In Greek mythology, Agamemnon married Clytemnestra, who later killed him. The focus here is on
a subplot involving Briseis/Briseide, a princess taken captive by Agamemnon, and the efforts of her
husband to rescue her.* La vittoria was said to be in preparation on 28 January 1701 M.V. It was
expected to open on 5 (PV) or 6 (CO) February 1702. On the 11th it was enjoying a great concourse
(BG). Passarini notes in the libretto that his text was sent from Hanover.*' Boniventi was described
as a young man of great ability and virtue (PV).

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 363; Groppo 367; Wiel 12; Alm 489

Tiberio, imperatore d'Oriente Music by Francesco Gasparini
[TIBERIUS, EMPEROR OF THE EAST]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Gio. Domenico Pallavicini
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Fat Week)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1702-02-19

Without dedicatee

When Tiberius II, a Thracian, was Eastern Emperor [578-582], Ravenna and Carthage figured prominently
among his domains. In this prelude to his story, Sophia, the widow of his predecessor Justin II [565-578],
had her hopes for the adoption of Justin's nephew, Justinian, disappointed.

Tiberio was first performed agreeably on 19 February 1702 (PV). A printer's note in the libretto
praised the virtue of Sig. Francesco Gasparini, the honored maestro of the donzelle who sing in the
choir of the Pieta, and the suavity of his harmonious notes enriched with various caprices.... Scarlatti's
setting of the same text was given in Naples in May 1702. Tiberio was revived at San Fantin as Le vicende
d'amor e di fortuna (1710/2). On the evening of 24 February an adolescent member of the Marcello
family (which co-owned the theater with the Cappello family) was involved in a fight which caused

* Carnival was kept brief in 1702 on account of the many difficulties posed by battles in nearby principalities.

* Passarini (fl. 1696-1731) was from Verona. Many of his texts were set over the next decade for nearby locations in the Veneto  Rovigo,

Dolo, and Treviso.

5 Passarini's drama was modeled, according to Allacci (Drammaturgia, col. 825), ona work called La Briseide, which corresponds to a work
by F. Palmieri, set by Agostino Steffani for performance in Hanover in 1696 (Sartori 4149).

* That is, the work that had been given other times in Anspach (I-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1584, letter from Lorenzo Zanchi).
The work in preparation at San Cassiano [L arte in gara con |'arte] is mentioned in the same letter, which further reports that at San Giovanni
Grisostomo non fa niente.

5 However, he must have come to Venice for the performance because he says he had to truncate the text the day before the production opened.

*8 Pallavicini, who may have been from Brescia, served as secretary to the Elector Palatine Johann Wilhelm in Diisseldorf in the early years
of the new century. The libretto claimed (correctly) that the author and the dedicatee both lived lontano fuori d' Italia.

* The publisher notes in the libretto (only 48 pp.) that only a few days of Carnival remained.

252 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

so much commotion that the performance had to be terminated. The instigator was called before the
Council of Ten three days later.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 365; Groppo 369; Wiel 13; Alm 491

1702/4 L'ingratitudine gastigata Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[INGRATITUDE PUNISHED]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With ballo SORTING DATE: 1702-02-22
& Dedicated to Giovanni Battista Cellini
 This revival of 1698/2, somewhat modified, opened agreeably on 22 February 1702 (PV). The libretto

was dedicated on 21 February 1702."' Arriving at the end of this very short season, the English visitor
Henry Bentinck, Duke of Portland, found the whole of Carnival to be no great thing.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 366; Groppo 370; Wiel 7; Alm 492

 1702c Serenata at the Cavallerizza. Cf. Suppl. 7.
1702/5 La pastorella al soglio Music by multiple composers
[THE SHEPHERDESS ENTHRONED]
An opera pastorale Text by Giulio Cesare Corradi
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1702-10-25
& Without dedicatee
 The text of La pastorella was purported to have been derived from English history of the tenth century.

King Edward married the rustic and nubile Aigina/Egina,TM who dreamt of giving birth to a luminous
planet a symbol of the able heir of whom she was to be the mother. The action takes place in London.
La pastorella was first performed with full applause on 25 October 1702 (PV), when it was described
as a bizarre entertainment.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 368; Groppo 372; Wiel 9; Alm 494

1702/6 Demetrio e Tolomeo Music by Antonio Pollarolo
[DEMETRIOS AND PTOLEMY]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Marchi

 I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 150, f. 171, entry of 4 Marzo 1702: Venerdi sera della passata nel Teatro di S. Angelo segui un grandissimo sconcerto,
causato di un nobbile giovinotto di Casa Marcello da i Cani, a causa che questo si voleva [f.171v] portare avanti, non ostante il gran popolo
che vi era, e perche molto sfozare il passaggio diede il suddetto nobile meno ad'un arma bianca, cosi caus6 tanto rumore, e disordine, in tutto
il Teatro, che non si fini di recitare Il' opera; e per cid fu lunedi sera da Consiglio di X deliberato di chiamarlo tempo 24. ore a presentarsi nelle
forze. A detta opera vi si ritornava nelle prime file il Signor Principale Palfi con molti suoi officiali, i quali hanno qui ordinati moltissimi abiti
per i loro soldati.

*' Silvani notes in the libretto that the first run (1698) lasted for fifteen days and that the work had been given in several other places in the
interim. He adds, however, that time constraints have prevented him from making any changes.

 Gibson, Royal Academy, pp. 81f.
 Identified also as an opera postuma in the libretto, for Corradi had recently died.

 The queen's name is fictional. The three Edwards of the tenth century were married respectively to Elfreda (I), Hedwig/Edvige (also 1),
Elfreda (II), and Edith (III). In Greek mythology, Aigina was one of Zeus's mistresses.

 CO (21 Ottobre) announced the opening for the following day.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 253

i Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With a coro and a danza SORTING DATE: 1702-11-16

zo Dedicated to Francois du Hamel

Ooo As ayoung commander, Demetrios of Macedonia was defeated by Ptolemy, the king of Egypt, at Gaza

in the fourth century BC. Ptolemy, who saw his victory from a sporting perspective, returned some
of the spoils to his opponent. The work was in production by 18 November 1702 (NV). A license to
print the libretto had been issued on the 11th, and it was dedicated on the 16th. Marchi praised the
celebrated virtue of the most valorous singers of Italy, who will appear in this work and the perfect
melody of Antonio Pollarolo, which would cover the defects of his text. This was the first production
under Giovanni Orsato, whose prior experience was in the Veneto, and who had been named impresario
in August. The arrangement lasted for only one year.*
A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 367; Groppo 371; Wiel 11; Alm 493

1702/7 Amar per vendetta Music attributed to Giovanni Maria Ruggieri
[To LOVE FOR REVENGE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Battista Neri
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli; abbattimento; aria cantata e ballata SORTING DATE: 1702-11-28
wz Without dedicatee
@ This first opera to be performed at San Moise in almost ten years was a revival of Clotilde (San Cassiano,

1696/5).' The production opened on 28 November 1702 (PV), when it was found to be pleasant
enough. Ruggieri's music was found to be based on most bizarre ideas.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 369; Groppo 373; Wiel 14; Alm 495

 1702d I pensieri divoti per la notte del Santissimo Natale. Cf. Suppl. 8.
1702/8 Gli imenei stabiliti dal caso" Music by Francesco Gasparini
[THE MARRIAGE MADE BY CHANCE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1702-12-26
is) Dedicated to Hannibal, Prince of Mittenburg
@ The plot concerns Clotilda, the queen of Sicily, her cousin Lindori, and their amorous involvements

with two cavaliers. Gli imenei was first performed on 26 December 1702 (BG). Its libretto was dedicated
on the 23rd; its title-page is dated 1703. It was said to have been as popular as L odio el amor (1702/9).
The venues (here San Cassiano, there San Giovanni Grisostomo) were said to present the foremost
singers of Europe (PV). Despite this accolade, the singers are not named in the libretto. It opened with
an eerie night-scene and concluded with a ballo for madmen.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 372; Groppo 376; Wiel 21; Alm 498

 The Marquis du Hamel (and of S. Remy) was hired by the Venetian Republic to lead a Prussian mercenary force. The plight of Demetrios
would not have made a flattering comparison with the dedicatee's situation. Later in life the marquis married Henriette, the widow of Marshal
Schulenburg.

 Although the story was essentially the same as that of Clotilde, many scenes were entirely revised (Groppo MS, p. 145).

 Pallade veneta, pp. 246f. The libretto comments on the reopening of the theater for music dramas on short notice.

254

1702/9

1}



1703/1

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

L'odio e l'amorTM Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo and others
[HATRED AND LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1702-12-27
Without dedicatee

The text, which is based on Persian history of the fifth century BC, concerns the relationship of Thomyris,
the widowed queen of the Massagetes, to the Persian king Cyrus. When Cyrus's plan to woo the widow
failed, he attacked her territory and captured her son. She avenged his misdeeds with a massacre of
his troops [530 BC], which was held to be one of the most savage of the era chronicled by Herodotus.
The text appears to have inspired that of Paolo Rolli for Giovanni Bononcini (London, 1721; Brunswick
and Wolfenbiittel, both 1724).

L odio was first performed on 27 December 1702 (M, PV).' The title-page of the libretto is dated 1703.
Noris promised in the libretto to fashion a new doctrine of drama which would feature more
fantasy...[and] elocution more elevated, noble, clear, and poetic than before. These changes, he hoped,
would suit San Giovanni Grisostomo, the theater of stupors and musical Campidoglio, which catered
to the glory of royalty and imperialism. In contrast to many works of the time, this was a notably
long work; its libretto ran to 79 pages. The work was praised in Pallade veneta for the equal virtues
of the poet and the composer and in the Mercurio for the composition and the voices.? The
appearances of Francesco de Grandis (Cecchino) as Arbace, Nicola Grimaldi (Nicolino) as Ciro,
and Diamante Scarabelli (Diamantina) as Jomiri drew special notice (PV). The virtuosity of the
singers, the majesty of the sets, and the splendor of the costumes were said to complement each other
(PV).

Arias: GB-Lbl (Naples, 1704); I-Ne

Listed as Bonlini 370; Groppo 374; Wiel 16; Alm 496

Gli amanti generosi Music by Benedetto Vinaccesi
[THE GENEROUS LOVERS]

A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Pietro Candi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1703-01-05

Dedicated to the Venetian nobility

The text is derived from the life of Artaxerxes (fourth century BC). The libretto professed to focus on
its protagonist's character: his qualities of being singularly prudent and learned while at the same time
concealing his vices. As portrayed here, Artaxerxes was envious of the amorous and military successes
of his brother Darius. In later revisions the contention between Hydaspes (disguised here as Acrone)
and Artaxerxes for the hand of Berenice was highlighted.

 Usually fully attributed to Pollarolo, but eight arias are also attributed to Aldrovandini in a Neapolitan manuscript.

7 Although the libretto was not dedicated, Prince Eugene could have been the intended patron. General of the Imperial Armies, he attended
a performance at San Giovanni Grisostomo on the 30th (BG).

 Or, alternatively, the 26th (BG).
 Pallade veneta, p. 249.

* The full cast is given in Saunders, Repertoire, p. 459. See also Pallade veneta, p. 248.

TM Little is known about the Candi (Gio. Pietro and Gio. Battista).

*5 Despite the anonymity of the subjects, dedications of this kind could be just as flattering as those addressed to single individuals. Here, for
example, the dedicatees were praised collectively for their beautiful spirits, heroic and pure.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 255

Oo Gli amanti was first performed on 5 January 1703 (PV). A license to print the libretto had been issued
on the 2nd. The work was called a curious entertainment... .in which the women became [progressively]
more superb and less beautiful (PV). The dedication suggests that the composer was a somewhat
unwilling party to this enterprise and that the arias would satisfy common taste better than they would
express his genius. Candi praised the spirited notes of Cav. Vinaccesi and the singular ability
of the virtuosi. Nonetheless, the text was revised for a resetting by Francesco Mancini for performance
in Naples (1705) and was later given in London under the title L Idaspe fedele. Broschi's setting (as
Idaspe) was given in Venice in 1730.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 371; Groppo 375; Wiel 24; Alm 497

1703/2 L'onor al cimento Music by Teofilo Orgiani
[HONOR ON TRIAL]
An opera musicale Text by Girolamo Colatelli
Given at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival?)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1703-01-15~
wz Dedicated to Benedetto Rigogli
mac) L'onor al cimento was based on a conventional tale from Tasso's Gerusalemme liberata in which Rinaldo

was first the enemy of and then the lover captivated by Armide. The work opened with a triumphal
scene in which Armide's chariot was pulled onto the stage by two lions. It ended happily in Jerusalem.
L'onor had been performed under such titles as Li amori e incanti d'Armida con Rinaldo in Rovigo
(1694), Treviso (1698), and Udine (1698). The bulk of this run would have occurred in the winter of
1703 (the title-page date), although its premiere could have occurred in advance of Advent 1702.

A No musical sources known
Bonlini 373; Groppo 377; Wiel 19; Alm 499.

1703/3 Il piu fedele fra i vassalli Music by Francesco Gasparini
[THE MOST FAITHFUL OF THE VASSALS]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1703-02-03
& Dedicated to Nicolao Santini
o>

The subject is ostensibly from Egyptian history of the third century BC, when King Ptolemy waged
war against the Seleucid king Antiochos. Here, however, the emphasis is on amorous intentions:
Antiochus is an Egyptian general betrothed to Arsinoe, while Ptolemy is engaged to the Assyrian princess
Tanisbe.*' The balli were for Moors and unchained prisoners. The work was revived as 1716/2.

76 I-Rvat, AS, NV N. 151, f. 10v, entry of 6 Gennaro 1703, announces the opening for dimani.
7 Colatelli wrote texts for two operas by Orgiani; the other was Armida, regina di Damasco (Verona, 1711).
78 A Florentine nobleman.

7 A remark in Collatelli's libretto for // trionfo d'Armide (1726) suggests that in this earlier account of the same tale Armide was portrayed
as lascivious rather than modest, as she was in the new version.

% Identified in the libretto as a gentleman from Lucca.

5! This is one of several works with some similarity to a Stratonica (libretto by Salvi; composer unknown) given in Florence in November
1707 (R. L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, pp. 209f).

256 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Oe The libretto was dedicated on 3 February 1703. The work was in production before the 17th, when
it was said to have brought great honor to its librettist. Silvani, however, received (and was charged
for) many more libretti than he believed he had ordered. After enduring much ridicule, he went to court
to seek justice.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 376; Groppo 380; Wiel 25; Alm 502

1703/4 Venceslao Music by Carlo Francesco PollaroloTM
[WENCESLAS]
A dramma [tragicomedia] (5) Text by Apostolo Zeno
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1703-02-07~
& Dedicated to Marquis Filippo Rangoni*

The historical Wenceslas IV reigned over Bohemia [1283-1305] and Poland [1302-1305]. In this account
his sons Casimir and Alexander were both in love with the princess Eirenike/Erenice but, reflecting
their contrasting personalities, the second had honorable intentions, while the first did not. The action
was set in Krakow, and one ballo was for Polish sculptors.

i) The dedicatee was present in Venice in early February 1703 and held a sumptuous festa di ballo on
the 14th (M). Zeno had written to Antonio Magliabecchi in Florence on 13 January that he had started
and finished, during a stay of more than a month in Conegliano, a drama to be recited in San Giovanni
Grisostomo during the present Carnival.*

 In a letter to Muratori in Modena on 24 February, Zeno reported that Venceslao enjoyed a singular
attendance and applause superior to its merit. He enclosed two copies of the libretto.** Giovanni
Buzzoleni sang in the title role, with Grimaldi as Casimir, Pietro Moggi as Alexander, Francesco de
Grandis as the general Ernando, Caterina Azzolini as Eirenike, and Diamante Scarabelli as Lucinda,
the queen of Lithuania.

o Pollarolo's setting was given again at the end of 1703 in Florence. Zeno wondered, ina letter to Anton
Francesco Marmi, whether the Florentine audience would like the work, which, he said, received more
applause than it deserved in Venice. The text was reset by Perti for Bologna (as II fratricida innocente,
1708; 1722) and by Mancini for Naples (1714). It was also given in a pastiche version by Porta, A.
Pollarolo, and Capelli (San Moise, 1723/3; San Giovanni Grisostomo, 1722/5; 1735/8), and in a new
setting by Pampani (San Cassiano, 1752/1). Caldara used it as a name-day entertainment for Charles

 1] pitt fedele was given at the Cocomero in Florence in the autumn of 1704, but Gasparini's letter to the Medici court of | February 1704
(shown in R. L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 199) seems likely to have accompanied his most recent work, which would have been
La fede tradita e vendicata, rather than this work.

3 I-MAas, AG, Carteggio, Busta 1584, letter of 17 Febbraro 1702 M.V. from Lorenzo Zanchi.
* The libretto claims that this was Pollarolo's twentieth work for San Giovanni Grisostomo.

5 Duke of Spilimbergo, although the family had ties to Modena, which had been invaded by French troops in 1702. From 1708 the Teatro
Rangoni opened on the site of the old Teatro Fontanelli. While no obvious reason for presenting him witha story from central European history
comes to mind, the Rangoni family had had clerical interests in Poland in the sixteenth century.

86 An anonymous note in the libretto says that the story is based on Corneille but is cast as a ragicommedia and introduces a new role for the
queen of Lithuania.

57 Lettere, i, 65.

58 / ettere, i, 67 (...qui recitato con un concorso singolare, e con un applauso superiore al suo merito, ed alla mia espettazione. Se voi |' onorerete
del vostro compatimento, lo stimerd molto pit fortunato). Ina letter of 13 Gennaro (I, 65) he said that the text had been written during a one-month
stay at the country home of Mons. Trevisani at Conegliano.

 R.L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, pp. 196f. They hint that the first performance of this work may have been in a private house in
Venice in 1702.

 Also dated 24 Febraio 1702 M.V. (Non so se cosi le sara piaciuto il mio Venceslao, che qui certamente ha riscossi pi applausi di quelli
che meritava. See the Lettere, i, 66).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 257

VI (Vienna, 1725). Handel adapted Zeno's text in his lost pastiche of the same title (HWV A4; King's

Theatre, London, 1731), which included musical borrowings from Vinci, Hasse, Porpora, and others.
A No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 375; Groppo 379; Wiel 15; Alm 501

1703/5 L'Almansore in Alimena Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[ALMANSOR IN ALIMENA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Matteo Giannini
" Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Fat Week?)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1703-02-10~
sy Dedicated to Prince Filippo Ercolani!

During the course of his formal engagement to Seripha, the princess of Fez, Almansor, the Saracen
king of Granada, fell in love with a woman in his own court. By promising to donate royal lands in
compensation, Almansor enlisted his lunatic brother Alindar to stand in as groom for him.

Oo The Roman princes Altieri and Ottoboni were in Venice on 17 February 1703, perhaps to witness
Ercolani's public entry. The Mercurio states that a large number of persons from Bologna, Ferrara,
and other cities of Romagna were in town towards the end of Carnival. Baron Martini had been present
since late January (NV). The gathering of this constellation of dignitaries suggests a sufficient cause
for the opening of an opera late in the season. It would help to explain the involvement of Pollarolo,
who was much favored by leaders of the Empire, at Sant' Angelo, which lacked the prestige of San
Giovanni Grisostomo. Since Carnival ended on the 20th, this opening should have occurred by the 13th.
Almansore had been given in Bologna in 1690 and in Reggio Emilia in the spring of 1696. Giovanni
Orsato, who was active in many places in northern Italy, signed the dedication.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 374; Groppo 378; Wiel 23; Alm 500

1703/6 La forza vinta dall'onore Music attributed to Nicold Le Mixte
[POWER CONQUERED BY HONOR]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Andrea Minelli
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1703-10-20~
& Dedicated to Giacomo Sperelli Spineda
 La forza treats the life of the emperor Caligula [37-41 AD], the precocious son of Germanicus, who

was well received at first but came to be severely disliked for his autocracy. According to Minelli, this

*' Prince Ercolani, who was from Bologna, took up the post of imperial ambassador to Venice in February 1703. In 1711 an envoy to Venice
from Lorraine, the Count of Armoises, was to complain to the Austrian authorities that Count Ercolani's absorption in opere, balli, e feste
di corte rendered his behavior as an ambassador irregular (I-Vas, IS, RC [Riferte dei Confidenti], Busta 592, fasc. Cremona 1711, entry
of 27 Febraro 1711).

* Although the libretto is unclear on this point, one possible reading of the title of the work is that the donated lands were in Sicily. The town
so called was founded in 1628 through a grant made by King Philip IV. Thus the Almansor in the title would have been the false Almansor.

 The duke of Mantua addressed letters (I-MAas, Busta 1584) to both on 17 February 1702-3. A note from the printer, Girolamo Albrizzi,
in the libretto began by saying that the work should appear in 1703 (Alamansore in Alimena deve comparire quest'an. 1703). This was a
rare statement that suggests some uncertainty.

* Fabbri and Verti (Due secoli, p. 47) give an informative account of the performance in Reggio. C. F. Pollarolo sat at the first harpsichord,
with his son Antonio at the second. The other instruments used were a violone, theorbo, two violoncelli (apparently one for continuo and one
for the accompaniment of solos), four violins, four violas, and a trumpet. Several of the performers were from Modena. The singers are not
named.

 Le Mixte is a shadowy figure who is identified in an undatable work of the same season, // trofeo dell 'innocenza, as a pupil of Giuseppe
Spogli. These are his only contributions to Venetian opera.

 A nobleman from one of the wealthiest families of Treviso. His palazzo was a repository of murals and paintings on classical subjects.

258 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

account was tailored to the needs of a small theater with young performers. La forza was first performed
between 20 and 27 October 1703 (M). A license to print the libretto had been issued on the 3rd.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 378; Groppo 382; Wiel 18; Alm 504

1703/7 Le finezze d'amore Music newly attributed to Nicola Giglio
[THE REFINEMENTS OF LOVE]
An opera pastorale Text by Andrea Minelli
im Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's?)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1703-11-05~
& Dedicated to Sebastiano Brun
oo This was a revival of the work given under the title Orfeo at San Fantin (1701/5) and as Le finezze

d'amore (Rovigo, 1698)."* The quality of the text is highly autumnal, which does not guarantee that
the work opened in the autumn, but an opening then would have filled a substantial void. It had been
an autumn work in its two previous productions. Minelli praised the sweet harmony of the music
and the beautiful style of execution (maniera) of the virtuosi in his deferential prefatory remarks.
The dedication was signed collectively by the company of San Fantin.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 377; Groppo 381; Wiel 20; Alm 503

1703/8 Il miglior d'ogni amore Music by Francesco Gasparini
per il peggiore d'ogni odio
[THE BEST OF EVERY LOVE FOR THE WORST OF EVERY HATE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
i Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1703-11-07
&o Dedicated to Joseph, Prince of Lorraine'

In this unusual plot, Sancho I, the king of Aragon (1063-1094), loved his horse so much that he kept
the animal in his bedchamber. The intrigues that developed from the care of this creature during his
absence form the basis of the somewhat whimsical plot. The portrayal of Spaniards could have been
prompted by the continuing War of the Spanish Succession, which had already had major effects on
northern Italy, extending to the dedicatee's homeland.'!

 This work was first performed on 7 November 1703 (M), when it received great applause. The libretto
had been dedicated on the 6th.
 To the extent that // miglior d'ogni amore might be considered a harbinger of comic opera, its

chronological position is tellingly apposite. In March 1703 the Grimani family, in a contract with San
Salvatore, had attempted to regulate comedy performances so as to exclude San Cassiano and Sant' Angelo

 Giglio's role is stated to have been that of compositore della musica in a document cited for Orfeo (1701/1703).

8 A license issued on 4 October 1698 to print the libretto (cf: Alm, Catalog, p. 306; Sartori 10388) would have been for the Rovigo production.
Its dedicatee was Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga. The libretto US-LAu 503, although grouped with 1703 materials, is for the 1698 production. A
performance in Rovigo in 1699 is also possible, since a license of 3 Ottobre 1699 to print a libretto for Le frezze d'amore could have been
a misquotation of Le frenesie [or Le finezze] d'amore. A copy of the libretto for the Venetian production of 1703 is in I-RVa.

 The work clearly had comic intent, although it is not acknowledged in this general designation.
' Although born in 1685, he was already a colonel of the imperial troops in Italy. He died in 1705.

'! The characterization could also be read as a veiled allusion to the Mantuan duke Ferdinand Carlo, who also loved horses  including the
hyperbolic 10,000 that were estimated to be roaming over the Piedmont when his court went into exile in Casale Monferrato in 1702. Ferdinand
had been a major promoter of equestrian events in Venice. The head injury he sustained in a riding accident in 1692 (I-Vnm, Cod, It. VI-469
[=12113], entry of 31 Maggio 1692) seemed to diminish his interest very little.

1703/9

i

Ea)
Oe

1703/10

im



OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 259

from staging such works.' Between 1703 and 1705-06, when the two latter theaters began to interleave
the acts of drammi per musica with comic intermezzi, miscellaneous comic roles become evident. In
this case the versatile singer Antonio Ristorini, soon to be a mainstay of the intermezzo repertory at
San Cassiano, took the comic role of Sancio.' Other members of the cast included Francesco Antonio
Pistocchi (Ramiro), Angelo Tagliavacca'TM (Consalvo), and Margherita Salicola Suini (Clotilde).
No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 379; Groppo 383; Wiel 22; Alm 505

Farnace Music by Antonio Caldara
[PHARNAKES]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Lorenzo Morari
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1703-11-19

Dedicated to Francesco Maria Pico!

The historical Pharnakes was ruler of Pontos in the second century BC. Much of the fictional story
related here revolved around the deeds of Thomyris, the warrior queen of the Scythians. Farnace was
first performed, with great applause, on the 19 November 1703 (M). The libretto had been dedicated
on the 15th. It was still in production (at least theoretically; see below) on 1 February. Gio. Battista
Carboni (from Mantua) sang in the title role, with Catterina Galerati (from the Tuscan court) as Thomyris.
Lucrezia d' Andre, who later left town without permission (see 1704/2), appeared as Cyrene. Before
the curtain was raised, there was a raucous concerto of trumpets, timpani, and other warlike instruments.
The text formed the basis of Giovanni Bononcini's Farnace (London, 1723).'%

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 380; Groppo 384; Wiel 17; Alm 506

Il giorno di notte Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[Day INTO NIGHT]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1703-12-26~

Without dedicatee

The text was based loosely on Roman history, but the emphasis was clearly on spectacle. The Emperor
Elagabalus was noted for his effeminate taste and extravagant indulgences (cf. 1667/6). He said he wished
to turn day into night, and this text projected a tongue-in-cheek realization of that wish.

This was apparently the work whose opening was anticipated on 27 October 1703 (M), but taking into
account its title-page date of 1704, it is unlikely to have opened sooner than late December. The work
opened with a low-pitched symphony (profonda sinfonia), which underscored the darkness of the
stage. Many specters of night  crawling creatures, ghosts, shimmering stars  appeared as Night
crept over a field of sunflowers. Four later balli featured shepherds and shepherdesses, nations, peasants,

' Cf, Ch. 8.1 and Suppl. 3a.

' Ristorini, who had come from the service of the Grand Prince of Tuscany, had made his Venetian debut as Evandro in Aristeo (1700). He
appeared in a number of other works given at San Cassiano in the years leading up to the regular interpolation of comic intermezzi at San

Cassiano.

104 4 virtuoso from the choir of San Marco, the ducal basilica.

"5 The duke of Mirandola, Pico (1688-1747) was minding the affairs of the Mantuan court during its exile in Casale Monferrato; the court
had been moved on account of continuing hostilities in Mantua. After many years of contention, Pico's hereditary seat in Mirandola was besieged
in 1704-05. Mirandola itself was eventually combined with the duchy of Mantua.

'6 Reported by Saunders in GO.

260 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

and gentlemen and women. The cast included Francesco de Grandis (Eliogabalo), Antonia Marzari
(Sabina), Vienna Mellini (Livia), and Giovanni Buzzoleni (Domizio).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 381; Groppo 385; Wiel 28; Alm 507

 1704a Pastoral at the Ospedaletto. Cf. Suppl. 9.
1704/1 La fede tradita e vendicata Music by Francesco Gasparini
[FIDELITY BETRAYED AND VINDICATED]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani''
im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1704-01-05
wz Dedicated to Francesco Tron'

While the early Goths of this account were locked in combat with the Scandinavians, several parties
to the conflict fell victim to the enchantments of the Norwegian princess Ernelinda.' She was the
daughter of Rodewald, the king who had been ousted by vassals. He took refuge with Ricimer, the Gothic
king, who had now fallen in love with Ernelinda, who in turn loved the Danish prince Vittigis/Vitige."

OO La fede opened on 5 January 1704 (NV),'"' the date of the dedication of the libretto, a printing license
for which had been issued on 30 December 1703. The cast was almost the same as for I/ miglior d'ogni
amore of the previous year. Singing in the principal roles here were Domenico Tempesti (Ricimero),
Antonio Ristorini (Rodoaldo), Margherita Salicola Suini (Ernelinda), and Francesco Antonio Pistocchi
(Vitige). The librettist praised the the highly regarded virtuosi of your orchestra, one member of which
was the violinist Tomaso Albinoni. The work was performed in Florence at the Cocomero c. 27 December
1704." Adaptations of the text were in use through 1750. See 1715/7 and 1726/3.

A Score in GB-Cfm
Listed as Bonlini 382; Groppo 386; Wiel 26; Alm 508

1704/2 Pirro Music attributed to Giuseppe Aldrovandini'?
[PYRRHOS]

A dramma per musica (5) Text by Apostolo Zeno

M1 Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival?)

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1704-01-07~

'' Carefully identified in this libretto as a servitore di Sua Altezza. Serenissima di Mantova.
'8 A Venetian nobleman, styled a patron of the theater in the libretto, Francesco Tron was the owner of San Cassiano.

 Silvani refers to this text in his note to the reader as his second drama conceived in haste. His rationalization for what he apparently considered
a poor text was that he aimed to serve music [and] serve the theater, rather than to exhibit his literary skills to best advantage.

" In other accounts of this story, the Norwegian king is called Umblio, the usurper is Scandone, refuge is sought with Astolfo/Aistulf, and
the daughter is Hedwig.

"" The transcribed date (I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 152, f. 13v) is 5 Dicembre 1703, but content and context both make it clear that the month was
recorded in error.

"2 R.L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 200. Orlandini reset Silvani's text for performance in Rome in 1712; his version was given
under various titles until 1730.

"3 In 1701 Aldrovandini was elected prince of the Accademia Filarmonica in Bologna. He was well regarded as a singing teacher and in 1702
was named an honorary composer of the duke of Mantua, who often sent students to Aldrovandini. Aldrovandini was one of the earliest composers
of comic opera but his early death (possibly due to inebriation: he fell into a canal while boarding a boat for Venice) may have curtailed the
development of interest in the genre. Pirro is credited to Clemente Monari in NGDMM/2 by Elvidio Surian, who maintains that the work may
have been performed only in Bologna in 1719 and not given at all in Venice in 1703-4.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 261

& Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo'*

To end tyranny, the people of Macedonia recruited Cassander to teach the heir apparent, Pyrrhos,
enlightened views of government. To add interest to the plot, Pyrrhos and Cassander's son Aridaeos
both fell in love with Ismene, the princess of Media.

OL While there is no firm date for the opening of Pirro, there is an obvious hole in Sant' Angelo's calendar
in January 1704, the principal month for Carnival in an unusually short season. All the theaters were
open by 12 January (M). The five-act structure strongly suggests a Carnival work. The libretto notes
that the work was written (except for a few scenes) in ten days, not by choice but by necessity.
Complaints were lodged on behalf of Lucrezia d' Andre (Madama d'Caro) on 31 January and 1
February, when the singer did not appear, on the grounds that her honorarium was too small, particularly
in light of the revenues coming from the nightly sale of tickets and folding chairs (scagni).'"

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 383; Groppo 387; Wiel 27; Alm 509

1704/3 Il trofeo dell'innocenza Music by Nicold Le Mixte"
[THE TROPHY OF INNOCENCE]
A dramma musicale Text by Andrea Minelli
mr Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1704-01-07~
& Dedicated to Cristoforo Rovere'!
 The text related the story of Laodikeia, the queen of Cappadocia, who has arranged for the marriage

of five of her seven children. Only the twins Pharnakes and Adrastos remain. Roxane, a princess from
a rival kingdom, sets her sights on Pharnakes, to the dismay of his mother and the disappointment of
his brother. // trofeo must have run during the short Carnival season of 1704, which was concentrated
in January. It was the last opera to be presented at San Moise until 1715.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 386; Groppo 390; Wiel 33; Alm 512

1704/4 Il pastore d'Anfriso Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[The Shepherd of Amphrise]
A tragedia pastorale (5) Text attributed to Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti
rd Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With intermezzi containing balli and a coro SORTING DATE: 1704-01-12~
a Dedicated to Alessandro Molin, N.V.'!
[oRO) Il pastore d'Anfriso  with its choruses of shepherds, hunters, satyrs, rivers, and winds, and a cast

of Greek gods (Apollo, Daphne, et al.)  was little changed from the original version (1695/2), although

its elaborate intermedi were modified and the cast revised. Antonia Marzari retained the role of Dafne,
"4 The duke of Mantua was not present in Venice during the Carnival of 1703-4, owing to his sojourn in France, and in fact his next visit to
Venice did not occur until approximately November 1704. A new group of officials represented him there, however, and the dedication could
have been made in absentia.

"5 The work is not specifically identified as Pirro, for which no cast was listed in the libretto. D' Andre had taken the role of Cirene in Farnace
(1703/9). Francesco Santorini, the manager of the theater, cited her for breach of contract (see I-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti G. A. Guerrini,
Busta 6915, item of 31 Gennaro 1703 M.V.). She filed papers against him in return (I-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti B. Ballarin, Reg. 1586, same
date). Santorini was then ordered by the Council of Ten to pay her through the following day (Atti Marco Guerrini, item of | Febraro 1703
[M.V.]), indicating that the work in question was still in production. Agostino Rosa was named with Santorini as a co-defendant. By the Ist,
d'Andre was reported to be out of town, but on the Sth the impresari were ordered to pay her through that date. They claimed ticket sales of
20 ducats a night for the last three days of January.

"6 Le Mixte is here identified as a pupil of Giuseppe Spogli.
"7 & nobleman from Treviso.

"'8 Praised in the dedication of the libretto for the contributions of his family to the defense of Greece and IIlyrium.

262

B

 1704b
 1704c
 1704d
 1704e

1704/5

11

Ome

1704/6

i"

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

but Giovanni Archi took the role of Apollo, with Viena Mellini (Clicia) replacing Diamante Maria
Scarabelli and Francesco de Grandis (Licisco)succeeding Francesco Ballarini.''? The libretto was
dedicated on 12 January 1704 and the work is likely to have opened soon after.

No musical sources known'
Listed as Bonlini 384; Groppo 388; Wiel 29; Alm 510

Sfoghi di giubilio. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
Festa accademica. Cf. Suppl. 7.
Dalla bellezza, virtu, ed amore. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Serenata a 4. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

La vendetta disarmata dall'amore Music by Girolamo Polani'!
[REVENGE DISARMED BY LOVE]

A dramma [pastorale] per musica Text attributed to Francesco Passarini'
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1704-11-02~

Dedicated to Domenico Delai'

Although the text was said to come from the shores of Spain, the story took place in England. Its
cast included King Everhard and his sister Rosicleria, Prince Henry and Princess Stella of Salver, and
the general Lewis. The general had been in love with Rosicleria prior to his retirement from court, but
it is Henry who now could save her life.

Intended for performance during both the autumn and winter seasons, this short work opened after 2
November 1704.' It had been given with applause'?> in Rovigo in October 1703 as La costanza
nell'onore. The text was reset by Buini (Bologna, 1724). Francesco Rossi, as impresario of the theater,
filed a notarial complaint (stragiudiziale) in November against Antonio Pollo, whom he claimed was
to have secured the services ofa singer whose name is given only as Pietro. The singer had been absent
for twenty days, leaving both the rehearsal schedule and the actual production in a state of chaos.'
No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 385; Groppo 389; Wiel 32; Alm 511

La maschera levata al vitio Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini
[THE DISGUISE RAISED TO VICE]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1704-11-04

"? Full casts for both versions are given in Saunders, Repertoire, pp. 455, 460.

"2 See the sources for 1695/2.

"2! Polani was active in Venice and the Veneto from 1689 until 1720, when he went to London.

'2 The dedication of the libretto is signed F. P.

' A Brescian nobleman.
'24 T_Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Attilio Centon, Busta 3904.

5 According to the text of the dedication here.

6 1-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Attilio Centon, Busta 3904. The entry date is 2_ (second digit illegible) Novembre 1704. The surname, represented
by a series of dots in the first reference, appears to be Perino in a later reference. A family of like-named singers was active in the 1720s.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 263

& Dedicated to Giovanni Battista Labia'?'
More than most plots of the time, this was a morality play in which the philosophy of the tutor Aletes
was intended to protect the virtue of Eriphyle, the daughter of the recently deceased king of Sicily. The
work's theme is derived from the proverb Love and ambition are the two rocks on which the ship of
innocence most easily founders. Quite unusually, La maschera opened with a soliloquy.

Or  La maschera levata was first performed on 4 November 1704 (M). Libretti were dedicated on the 2nd
and the 4th.'8 Buini's setting of the same work was staged in Bologna both under its original title (Teatro
Marsigli Rossi, 1730) and as // filosofo ipocrita (Teatro Formigliari, 1735). The Mantuan minister
Francesco Ferdinando Galvani reported that the words were beautiful but the production was not
uplifting (it provided poca levatura''). Thus, it was not much appreciated in Venice. Only three singers
Maria Domenica Pini (Tilla; here Erifile), Margarita Salvagnini (Ermione), and Domenico Tempesti
(Abbattino; here Eurimede)  were justly applauded. The last, he noted, who sings ina fully artistic
way, was a pupil of Pistocchi.'? Antonio Ristorini sang as Alete.

Ai No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 387; Groppo 391; Wiel 34; Alm 513

1704/7 Virginio console Music attributed to Antonio Giannettini
[VIRGINIUS THE CONSUL]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
M Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1704-11-10
& Without dedicatee

Lucius Virginius Rufus served as consul three times in the first century but refused to become emperor
after the death of Nero [68 AD]. Here amorous intrigues involve Valeria, the daughter of Virginius.

o Virginio console was first performed on 10 November 1704 (M, PV). Antonio Giannettini, formerly
engaged in Mantua, had assumed the role of impresario at Sant' Angelo in July. He was appalled by
conditions there and ordered many improvements.'* In a report of 1 November, the Mantuan agent
Galvani had said that all the singers in this work would be new to the Venetian stage. Two weeks later
he reported that the work met with mediocre applause, despite beautiful scenes and bizarre costumes.
The tenor from Parma who sang in the title role was applauded, and the women were rather good,
but the other singers were poorly received.'*!

 A correspondent for Pallade veneta who attended the opening was more generous. He said the work
was greeted with universal applause and that the machine of delight swings [like a pendulum] between
the poles of Nicolin [Nicola] Paris and Signora [Caterina] Volsechi. Members of the cast are not
otherwise identified but probably corresponded to those in Artaserse (1705/3).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 388; Groppo 392; Wiel 31; Alm 514

"7 4 Venetian nobleman.
"8 .9., US-LAu 513 for the earlier date and Sartori for the later.

129  con tutta l'arte. I-MAas, AG, Carteggio, Busta 1585, entry of 8 November 1704. Pini (here Erifile), from the Florentine court, had
sung at San Giovanni Grisostomo in the 1690s. Salvagnini (Ermione) and Tempesti (Eurimede) sang. Faint praise was offered for Raffael
Baldi (Eristene), who was also from the Florentine court.

80 |_Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Antonio Ciola, Busta 4025, item of 14 Luglio 1704. But in the Atti Attilio Centon, Busta 4025, item of 23
Luglio 1704, Giannettini is named together with Francesco Santorini. A document of 29 Giugno 1704 in the same source notes that the exterior
of the theater (specifically the pilasters and marble columns facing onto the Corte del Albero) was severely deteriorated. It notes that income
from bollettini was estimated at six per box per performance.

'!]-MAas, AG, Carteggio, Busta 1585, report of 15 November 1704. Among the other singers were Nicola Paris (nicknamed di Brunsvic
but shortly to be in the employ of the vice-regal chapel at Naples) and the Venetian Caterina Volsechi (Pallade veneta, p. 258).

264

1704/8

1705/1

i



mM

is)


A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

La fortuna per dote Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[GOoD FORTUNE FOR A DowRY]

A tragicomedia (5) Text attributed to Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With cori d'intermezzo with balli SORTING DATE: 1704-11-29
Without dedicatee

The emperor Theodosius (Luigi Alberelli) had five sisters. One of them, Flacilla (Viena Mellini), who
was to succeed her brother, was courted by the somewhat rustic Marzianus (Anton Francesco Carli).
In its entirety the work was a paean to extending political power through advantageous marriages. In
its emphasis on spectacle, this tragicomedia was an unintended parody of heroic opera.

Lafortuna per dote was first performed, with magnificent scenery, on 29 (PV) or 30 November 1704.'*
According to the Mercurio, the work received universal applause. The five-act structure gave scope
to five elaborate choruses serving, on the model of // pastore d'Anfriso, as intermedi. All five involved
choral singing and the accompaniment of various consorts of instruments. In the first, warriors and
Amazons battled while trumpets and other military instruments played. The second, featuring sailors
and fishermen, involved diverse instruments; Cadmus and Amore looked on. In the third, followers
of Bacchus played harpsichords (cembali) as their leader was transported in a carriage drawn by tigers.'**
According to the libretto this was done using license, which permits the mixing of an element of joy
into the most serious spectacles. ..to celebrate the coronation of Theodosius. Nymphs and shepherds
celebrated the coronation of Flora in the fourth number, while cavaliers and gentlewomen celebrated
three weddings in the final number.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 389; Groppo 393; Wiel 35; Alm 515

La Fredegonda Music by Francesco Gasparini
[FREDEGONDE]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1705-01-10

Dedicated to Lorenzo Versuzio Beretti-Landi'TM*

The text, derived from the history of the Visigoths on the Iberian peninsula, alludes to Spanish-French
relations through the king Athanagilde and his Frankish son-in-law Chilperic. Fredegonde, whose
behavior was often vicious, was Chilperic's third wife.'*> The librettist and the dedicatee were both
previously associated with the duke of Mantua, whose duchy was subject to continuing conflict between
modern France and Spain (via the Empire). La Fredegonda was first performed on about 10 January
1705. It closed during the week of January 24 to 31 (M). Its libretto had been dedicated on December
26, 1704.'* Margherita Salicola Suini sang in the title role with Antonio Ristorini (Chilperico), Maria
Domenica Pini (Atanagildo), and Domenico Tempesti (Ermengildo).

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 390; Groppo 394; Wiel 40; Alm 516, 517

'? The 30th, given in (M) and (NV), was the first Sunday of Advent and therefore unlikely to be correct.

'3 This concluded an act in which animals captured in the hunt and hunters' tools adorned the stage.

134

Here identified as a papal legate to the Swiss Federation, but see 1701/4.

5 The Visigoth Athanagilde ruled Toledo from 554 until his death in 567. Chilperic, the brother of Sigebert, took Athangilde's daughter
Galswintha as his second wife in order to gain her lands, but strangled her once they seemed secure. Fredegonde fought Chilperic's sons by
his first marriage to secure the same lands for her children.

'36 As Groppo points out (MS, p. 150), there is a great difference in length between the two versions of the libretto, both dedicated on the same
day. Alm 516 and its analogues contain 72 pp., while Alm 517 (and analogous prints) contain only 60 pp.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 265

1705/2 L'enigma disciolto* Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[THE ENIGMA SOLVED]
A dramma [pastorale] per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Battista Neri'*'
im Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's?)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1705-01-12~
4 Dedicated to Gerolamo Alberti'
Oo This short pastoral work featured three Arcadian figures  Eurilla, Filli, and Tirsi as well as a satyr

and a wild beast. Eurilla is the assumed name of the shepherdess Orinda, who is half-wild. She disappears
shortly before her wedding. L enigma, which had been given for the spring fiera of 1698 in Reggio
Emilia,' opened at San Fantin shortly after 12 January 1704 [M.V.], the date of dedication of its libretto.
A license to print the libretto had been issued on 30 September 1700 [sic]. The title-page is dated 1704
M.V. For a work of modest expectations, L enigma had a substantial career. It was revived as Gl'amici
rivali at San Fantin (1715/3), and Antonio Bononcini adapted Pollarolo's music for an autumn production
in Modena in 1716.'* It also circulated, under various titles, in the Veneto.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 392; Groppo 396; Wiel 30; Alm 519

1705/3 Artaserse Music by Antonio Giannettini
[ARTAXERXES]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati'*!
mM Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1705-01-16
& Dedicated to Georg Ludwig, Duke of Hanover!

Agamira was the mistress of Artaxerxes, who succeeded Xerxes as ruler of the Persian Empire in 464
BC. She raised the illegitimate Darius under the assumed name of Cleomenes, which caused many
complications in the royal line of succession. The story was set in Susa.'*

CO The libretto Artaserse was dedicated on 8 January 1705, and the production was to open on 16 January.
It was hoped that it would bring contentment (PV). The announced opening date could have been
perfunctory, since Carnival did not actually open until the 19th.'* Francesco Guicciardi sang in the

'57 Neri (d. 1726) was a secretary to the new imperial ambassador to Venice, Prince Filippo Ercolani.

'8 The Alberti were added to the Venetian nobility in 1658. They lived on the fondamento running along the Rio San Barnaba. The Alberti
held numerous diplomatic posts. Gerolamo was a secretary to the Venetian embassy in London in the 1670s and may have been the Venetian
ambassador to Poland at the time this work was dedicated.

3 Tn the performance in Reggio, the role of Tirsi was taken by Antonio Ristorini. Groppo (MS, p. 150) notes that the frontispiece in the Venetian
libretto relates to the earlier production, not to the Venetian one.

' Strohm, Opernarien, ii, 151.

'*' Pietro Pariati (1665-1733) adapted many of Zeno's dramas for the Venetian theaters. Zeno himself was increasingly preoccupied with other
responsibilities both within the Arcadian colony in Venice, in various offices, and from 1710 with the publication of the Giornale de' letterati
d'Italia. He was appointed a court poet in Vienna in 1714, was joined there by Zeno in 1718, and was succeeded by Metastasio in 1729. Bonlini
(Le glorie, p. 146) says that the libretto for Artaserse had previously been presented as a prose work (by Giulio Agosti) in Modena. By some
[apparently mistaken] accounts, Pariati adapted this libretto directly from Giulio Agosti's work (1714).

' The future king of England was at this time third in line of succession after the reigning Queen Anne and his mother, Sophia (1630-1714;
born a Palatine princess). Georg had won many distinctions in the War of the Spanish Succession (1701-1713), most recently in the Battle
of Blenheim (1704).

8 Stories about Artaxerxes were perennially popular in Venice (see the earlier account by Aureli and the later one by Metastasio), but this
is the only setting of Zeno's text for the Venetian stage. Zeno credits an account (Modena, 1700) by Giulio Agosti Reggiano as his source.
Giannettini was at this time nominally employed in Modena.

'41-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 153, entry of 17 Gennaro 1705, f. 50 (M) merely indicates that it had opened by the 24th. PV announced it the following

Friday during the week ending 10 Gennaro 1704 M.V. [From that source, the opening date is wrongly construed as 9 January in Mancini et
al., i/2, p. 58.]

266 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

title role. Nicola Paris (di Brunsvic) appeared as daspe. Two members of the cast  Costanza Maccari
(Agamira) and Giacomo (Jacopo) Troiani (Lido)  soon became known as intermezzi performers.
An anonymous setting of the text was given in Florence at the Cocomero in February 1707.'** Zeno's
text was set by Orlandini, with revisions by Mancini (Naples, 1708) and by Ariosti (London, 1724).
Giannettini's setting of it, with revisions by P. G. Sandoni, was given in Verona (1709).'

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 391; Groppo 395; Wiel 41; Alm 518

1705/4 Il Dafni Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[DAPHNIS]
A tragedia satirica (5) Text attributed to Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti
M1 Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With cori da intramezzi including balli SORTING DATE: 1705-01-30
& Without dedicatee
SS In classical mythology, Daphnis (Luigi Alberelli) , who was raised by the nymphs, had a very genial

disposition and a great love of music. The nymph Nomia" blinded him after he was unfaithful to her,
after which his songs became sad. In this satirical treatment, much of the meaning was conveyed through
the interludes. They included a chorus of witches who played, sang, and danced under a trellis of flowers,
achorus of two-faced nymphs, and a chorus of gods (Neptune, Sybil, Pluto, and Jove) who also played,
sang, and danced. Like all of Frigimelica-Roberti's texts, this one was purposely modeled on an ancient
exemplar  in this case on the tragedia satirica of Horace.'*

OOR 11 Dafni was first performed, with applause, on 30 January 1705 (M). Describing the work as a pastoral,
the Mantuan agent Galvani remarked that the voices were highly varied and the scenery sumptuous."
NV said it was received with satisfaction. Gio. Carlo Grimani had attempted to secure permission
from the Florentine court for the Neapolitan singer Matteo Sassani (Il Matteuccio) to perform during
Carnival, but he was deemed too ill to travel to Venice.'*

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 393; Groppo 397; Wiel 43; Alm 520

1705/5 Il principato custodito dalla frode Music by Francesco Gasparini
[THE PRINCIPALITY PROTECTED FROM USURPATION]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
mM Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1705-02-02
& Dedicated to Suzanne Henriette of Lorraine'!

The text, ostensibly based on Greek mythology, alludes to the absence of an apparent successor to the
new husband of the dedicatee, who was the new wife of the childless duke of Mantua. Upon the death
of Psytachos, the king of Messenia, a dispute over rights of succession developed between Iphigeneia,

5 On the basis of a libretto which cites him (and others) for the work given in Naples in 1708, R. L. and N. Weaver (Florentine Theater, p.
208) speculate that the music used in Florence may have been by Orlandini.

4 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 107.
47 Usually called Echenais.

'48 At 82 pages, the libretto was unusually long. Ordinarily, libretti for drammi per musica were in the range of 60-72 pp. Libretti for pastorals
were often shorter (c. 45 pp.).

 1_MAas, AG, Carteggio, Busta 1585, entry of 31 January 1705. The date is confirmed in I-Rva AS, NV, N. 153, entry of 31 Gennaro 1705,
f. 77v. The work is also described here as a pastorale, but the writer is less enthusiastic, saying only that it brought satisfaction.

'S0R.L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 197.
'S| The princess of Elboeuf was the new wife of Ferdinand Carlo, the duke of Mantua. She died at the end of 1710.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 267

(Maria Domenica Pini), a teenage daughter from his first marriage, and Merope (Margherita Salicola
Suini), his young second wife, lately discovered to be pregnant.

(o2) II principato was first performed on 2 February 1705 (M, BG),'? a date which (as the feast of Purification)
was normally forbidden. The libretto had been dedicated on 31 January. Carnival attendees in town
at the time included General Starhemberg,'*? who was commanding forces near Brescia. Its run must
have been disrupted by a fifteen-day jubilee, which was declared on the 6th.'TM

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 394; Groppo 398; Wiel 39; Alm 521

 1705a Il vaticinio di Proteo. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
 1705b Serenata for the duke of Mantua. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
1705/6 Antioco Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini
[ANTIOCHOS]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1705-11-10
& Dedicated to Ferdinando della Torre [Torriano], Baron of Taxis '%*
o@ The Syrian prince Antiochos fell in love with the Macedonian princess Stratonica, but after the two

kingdoms became entangled in a war, Stratonica was married to the Syrian king Seleucos, while
Antiochos was instructed to marry Argene, the daughter of Seleucos's Lydian ally. The work is situated
in Syria.'* Antioco was first performed, with applauso, on 10 November 1705 (M).'* The libretto
had been dedicated on 30 October.'** Nicola Grimaldi, who sang in the lead role, was well known from
his previous appearances at San Giovanni Grisostomo. Pasqualino Betti (7olomeo), who appeared only
in this work and its successor, Ambleto, was from the court of the duke of Orleans. Maddalena Buonavia,
whose career in Venice was brief, appeared as Stratonica.
fi Score in D-B; arias in A-Wn
Listed as Bonlini 395; Groppo 399; Wiel 36; Alm 522

1705/7 La fede ne' tradimenti Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[FAITH IN THE MIDST OF TREACHERY]

A dramma per musica Text by Girolamo Gigli

mM Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1705-11-11~

'S2 Date of opening confirmed in I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 153, entry of 7 Febbraro 1705, f. 88. (Saunders gives 10 January 1706 in GO, but this
would have created a conflict with Ambleto).

83 Guido von Starhemberg had won a series of imperial victories in Lombardy and the Alto Adige over the preceding three years.
54 GB-Lpro, SPV Ser. 99, Box 57, Broughton to Charles Hedges, Whitehall.

55 Baron of Taxis (also Torriano or Tassis or both) was the hereditary imperial postmaster for the Venice-Trent route. Married to Anna Maria
Felicia Gritti, he appears to have been a patron of Venetian opera over the past thirty years (see Scipione africano, 1677 and several titles of
the 1690s).

'86 The librettist acknowledges a debt to Corneille, although the lineage of related subjects in Venetian opera extends back at least to Minato's
Seleuco (1668).

'57 The date of opening is confirmed in I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 153, entry of 14 November (f. 792v), although during the preceding week it had
been announced for the 8th (f. 792).

'S8 A list of Bortoli's recent publications (including Taican, Mitridate, et al.) is appended to this and numerous subsequent libretti.

' In some accounts (e.g., Sonneck and NG) revisions by Giuseppe Beretta are credited. The story seems to be related in certain respects to
Domenico David's La forza della virti (set by Pollarolo as 1692/10).

268

1705/8

oo

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Dedicated to Zorzi Melli'

In Iberian history of the eleventh century, Fernando, the count of Castile, a previous enemy of Sancho,
the late king of Navarre, decided to marry the Navarrese princess Sancha.'*' Sancho's son and successor
Garcia did not approve the union and attempted to subvert it.' A fictional role for Elvira, a sister of
Fernando who fights in male costume, has been added.

The libretto for La fede ne' tradimenti was dedicated on 30 October 1705, but the production seems
to have opened after Antioco (said to be the first work in the new season). Gigli's text had first been
set by Giuseppe Fabbrini (Siena, 1689). Pollarolo took it up quickly (Bologna, 1690), and it was
apparently his work which was revived in Mantua in 1697. However, his earlier Anagilda, on arelated
subject, had been staged in Reggio Emilia in 1685 (see 1692/10). A pastiche version of La fede was
given in Pesaro (1717). A setting by Predieri was presented during the first season of productions at
the new Teatro alla Pergola in Florence (September, 1718). Buini reset it for the Accademia de' Remoti
in Faenza in 1723. Under the title Anagilda it was set by Caldara (1711) and Sarti (1758). Grua set Gigli's
text for Sant' Angelo (1721/8), while Pampani's Anagilda (San Cassiano, 1735/2) was based on a different
account. Anonymous music was used in 1749/3 (San Moise).

Score (pastiche, Pesaro, 1717): GB-En
Listed as Bonlini 396; Groppo 400; Wiel 44; Alm 523

Flavio Bertarido, Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo

re de' longobardi
[FLAVIUS BERTARIDE, KING OF THE LOMBARDS]

A dramma per musica Text by Stefano Ghisi
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli' SORTING DATE: 1705-12-01

Dedicated to Cardinal Vincenzo Grimani

The Lombard king who is the subject of this text reigned in the latter half of the seventh century. After
the death of his father Aribert [661; cf. 1684/5], the kingdom was divided between Flavius Bertaride
and his younger brother Godebert. The latter, with the assistance of Duke Grimaldi of Benevento,
attempted to conquer the lands of Bertaride by offering to marry Grimaldi's daughter. Numerous fictional
elements are added to the plot, which was loosely derived from Corneille's Le Cid. Flavio appears to
be the greatly applauded work which opened on 1 December 1705, with a cast including Matteo Sassani
(Matteuccio) (NV) as well as Anton Francesco Carli (Flavio Grimoaldo), Stefano Romani (the captain
Oronte), and Gio. Battista Carboni (Onulfo). The run continued after Christmas.'

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 398; Groppo 402; Wiel 47; Alm 526, 527, 528

6 A Venetian citizen (literally a cittadino, the middle rank in the Venetian social structure). His name is given as Meli in the libretto.

| According to a note in the libretto, her name was changed here to Anagilda to make a better sound in the music.

' The Historia della perdita e riaquisto della Spagna occupata da Mori (Bologna: Gioseffo Longhi, 1676)] by[Bartolomeo de] Rogatis is
credited with the outlines of the story. Rogatis (1596-1656) was a Venetian who had traveled to Valencia.

'8 Groppo (MS, p. 152) says that one version only of the libretto indicates a ballo at the end of the work; two other versions lack the indication.
Alm's listings 526, 527, and 528 all contain three balli.

4 The title-page is dated 1706, but all histories seem to classify it as a 1705 work. Some copies of the libretto (e.g., US-LAu 525) conclude
with a list of the musical works recently published [like the libretto] by Antonio Bortoli.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 269

1705/9 Creso tolto a le fiamme Music attributed to Girolamo Polani
[CROESUS SPARED FROM THE FLAMES]
A dramma per musica Text by Aurelio Aureli'
mM Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With intermezzi and balli SORTING DATE: 1705-12-12~
& Dedicated to Andrea Navagiero, Overseer of Palma!
OO The enormously wealthy Croesus, king of Lydia, was defeated by the Persian Cyrus the Great. The

libretto for Creso related a fable about Croesus thinking himself the happiest man alive because of his
wealth and then repenting his hedonism after he was imprisoned by Cyrus. In a fictional overlay,
Croesus's wife Clymenides, disguised as a shepherdess, stole into Cyrus's camp to see her husband.
Creso opened during the week ending on 12 December 1705.' The libretto (US-LAu 524) was dedicated
on the 4th.' The two baili in this work are for phantoms of sleep and followers of caprice. Both
are suggestive of instrumental pieces of an impressionistic nature later composed by the Venetian
violinists Giorgio Gentili and Antonio Vivaldi.'

fi No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 397; Groppo 401; Wiel 42; Alm 524, 525

1705/10 Ambleto* Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini
[HAMLET]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
mM Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1705-12-26
a Dedicated to Federigo Cavalli, N.V.

This tale from the Gothic middle ages bears little resemblance to Shakespeare's Hamlet, although it
was situated in the Danish court and revolved on the same historical figure.'' Here the young Hamlet,
who loves the Dutch princess Veremonda,'' was subjected to several tests of his character by his father,
the wicked tyrant Fengon.' Nicola Grimaldi sang in the title role, with Maria Domenica Pini (La
Tilla') as Veremonda, and Lorenzo Santorini as Fengone.

Oo Ambleto opened on 26 December 1705.' A license to print the libretto had been issued on 18 December.
The title-page was dated 1706. By 7 January 1706, when the oboist Monsieur [Henri?] de Noie returned
to Venice, the production had gathered steam.' The run was in progress with grand applause during

'65 Creso was the subject of a tragedy by Gerolamo Bartolomei in 1632 (cf. Riccoboni, Histoire, p. 111).

66 Alm 524 and its analogues contain this dedication; Alm 525 and its analogues contain no dedication. The dedicatee was apparently the
descendant of a like-named Venetian ambassador to Spain in the sixteenth century. The family had holdings both near the Pieta and on the
island of Murano.

7 T-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 153, entry of 12 December 1705, f. 914.
'68 US-LAu 525 and I-Veg 59.4.114/3 lack dedications.

' Vivaldi's concerto La Notte (Op. 10, No. 2, c. 1728) contains varying numbers of movements in different sources. Some evoke images
of sleep, phantoms, and dreams. Gentili's impressionistic Capricci Op. 3 were published in Amsterdam in c. 1706.

' The libretto was published with a loose sheet of errors and corrections (Groppo MS, p. 152). Shakespeare's geography was somewhat amiss,
but this was not known at the time.

'"' She is usually described as a princess of Albania.

'? Zeno's interest in Scandinavian subjects had been growing since 1701, when he thanked Magliabecchi for sending him the Danish and
Swedish stories (Lettere, i, 43).

'3 |-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 153, entry of 26 December 1705, f. 952.

4 Monsieur de Noie could conceivably have had a connection with the French general cited elsewhere as Sig. Conte di Noielles, who was
soon after [August 1706] stationed in the vicinity of Genoa. Henri Noe was maitre de musique at St.-Andre-des-Arts, Paris, in 1707 (see Yolande
de Brossard, Musiciens de Paris, 1535-1792, actes d'etat civil d'apres le Fichier Laborde de la Bibliotheque Nationale [Paris: Editions A.
& J. Ricard & C.ie, 1965], p. 226).

270 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

the second week (9-16) of the month (M, BG). Gasparini's work was performed one year later (from

29 December 1706) with a different cast at the Cocomero in Florence. It was given in 1711 in Naples.

The text was also set by Domenico Scarlatti (Rome, 1715) and by Giuseppe Carcani (Venice, 1741).
fi Arias in D-Bds; GB-Lbl

Listed as Bonlini 399; Groppo 403; Wiel 37; Alm 530, 531

1706/1 La regina creduta re Music attributed to Giovanni Bononcini
[THE QUEEN WHO WAS THOUGHT TO BE A KING]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
mn Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Lesba e Bleso' SORTING DATE: 1706-01-09~
& Without dedicatee

OOo This treatment of the early life of Semiramis, the Babylonian queen, was different from both earlier
and later ones, particularly in introducing roles from other ancient traditions.' A license to print the
libretto was issued on 6 January 1706. The production was in progress, with grand applause, by 16
January (M, BG).' La regina appears to be the earliest Venetian opera to have been performed with
comic intermezzi,'* and this could possibly suggest the practice of Bononcini, whose wife (Margherita
Balletti) came from a family of actors and comici. The work was given at the Brunswick court in 1708.
fi Arias in D-Bds, SWI; GB-Lcm (prob. Brunswick, 1708)

Listed as Bonlini 400; Groppo 404; Wiel 49; Alm 532

1706/2 Filippo, re della Grecia Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[PHILIP, KING OF GREECE]
A dramma per musica (5) Text attributed to Pietro Giorgio Barziza'
iM Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1706-01-16~
 Dedicated to the women of Venice'
i) Enormous jealousy existed between the two sons of Philip V of Macedonia [221-179 BC]. At the urging

of the elder prince, Perseus, Philip participated in the murder of his younger, Demetrios. A license to
print the libretto was issued on 7 January 1706. The original plan may have been to open that day, but
the insistence of the oboist Monsieur de Noie on a regalo of 100 doppie, corresponding to the amount
he said he received from San Cassiano, proved to be an obstacle.'*! The work was in progress, with
grand applause, by 16 January (M).

Ow Anton Francesco Carli sang in the title role with Stefano Romani (Perseo) and Matteo Sassani (Demetrio).
Like most five-act works, the production involved numerous machines. The action began on a dark,

"5 The title as given in manuscript in I-Fm (Sartori 13391). Roles for Bleso and Lisa [sic] are listed in the libretto.
'%8 See the Semiramide of Moniglia (1670/4) and Silvani (1714/1).

' The date has sometimes been taken as old-style, but if it were, there would have been a conflict (in 1707) with /figenia. Bononcini wrote
to Rosalba Carriera on 27 November 1706 (Sani, Carriera, p. 110) stating that he could not obtain a license to come to Venice during the
following [i.e., 1707] Carnival. A Florentine copy of the libretto for the associated intermezzi is dated 1705.

'8 The issue is muddled by Groppo's dubious claim (MS, p. 153) that the text of La regina was related, though with numerous changes,
to the text of Loracolo in sogno (1700/1).

' Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 148) and Groppo (MS, p. 153) say that the attribution to this count is found only in manuscript catalogues. Both list
the work as anonymous; the attribution appears, however, in Allacci's Drammaturgia.

891 iterally le dame di Venezia.

'8! According to Gio. Carlo Grimani, the previously agreed payment was 80 doppie. The oboist also demanded a deposit against his pay and
travel expenses from Genoa to Venice and then onward from Venice to Mantua (I-MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1586, entry of
8 Gennaro 1706).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 271

tempestuous sea from which arose such hallmarks of Venetian pageantry as the god Neptune on his
throne and marine monsters. It ended with the coronation of Perseus.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 401; Groppo 405; Wiel 46; Alm 533

1706/3 Statira Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini
[STATEIRA]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
mM Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Florinetta e Frappalone' SORTING DATE: 1706-02-03
&o Dedicated to Giovanna Caraccioli, Princess of Santo Buono!
 The text is loosely derived from Persian history. Stateira, the daughter of the late Artaxerxes, was destined

to marry Arsakes, one of the captains of the army. Barsina, the daughter of King Cyrus, was also in
love with Arsakes. The consequences of this conflict led to a civil war. Statira was first performed on
3 February 1706,'** when it was received with satisfaction (M). The libretto had been dedicated on
2 February 1705. A revised version was given (Florence, Cocomero) for the Carnival of 1708.'*
 This is the earliest San Cassiano opera with a surviving text for comic intermezzi. It is therefore
noteworthy that the dedicatee was the Neapolitan consort of the Spanish ambassador. According to
the dedication, she was also worthy of inclusion in the Arcadian colony. While the dramma per musica
was by Zeno, who was staunchly opposed to the inclusion of comic characters in such dramas, the
revisions were by Pariati.
fi Score in A-Gk; aria in D-Bds (1706)
Listed as Bonlini 402; Groppo 406; Wiel 38; Alm 534

1706/4 La Fillirosa Music by multiple composers
[FILLIROSA]
A dramma per musica Text by Angelo Bergonzini
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1706-11-02~
& Dedicated to Renier Foscarini, N.V.'*
 All the characters (Filloreste, Fillirosa, Arlinda, etal.) in this short work appear to have been fictional.'*

The cast ostensibly included Sardinian, Spanish, and Moorish kings and their wives and mistresses.
A contract for a minimum of four performances, which are likely to have begun in November, was drawn
up in September 1706. Zanetta Steffani was one of the singers.'**

' Survived by a manuscript libretto, I-Vnm, Cod. It. IV-1986 (= Dramm. 902.15), which is listed as Sartori 10944.

'S The prince of Santo Buono was the Spanish ambassador to Venice, where he resided from August 1706 to May 1711 (I-Vas, IS, RC, Busta
592, Fasc. Cremona 1711, entry of 26 Maggio 1711). The princess was an ardent Arcadian.

'S Saunders gives 10 January 1706 in NGDMM/2, but this would not have been possible because Amb/eto was still running.

'8S RL. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 213. Zeno wrote to Marmi of the planned Florentine production on 24 February 1707 M.V.,
Intendo che la mia Statira abbia ricevuto un miglior trattamento. Godo che il nuovo impresario sia per attendere con pid di applicazione e
di gusto alla buona elezione de' drammi (Lettere, i, 189f). He also enquires about the Florentine reception of the work by Frigimelica-Roberti
[/ prodigi dell'innocenza, a rewrite of the 1694 Ottone which appears to have opened just after Christmas 1707 at the Cocomero].

'8 Ranier Foscarini (as his name is given in the libretto) was the manager of the theater and was shortly to take it over; see below. The Foscarini
were added to the nobility in 1701. One branch of his family was involved in the jewel trade.

'7 Substantial additions for the second and third acts are appended to the libretto US-LAu 537.

'8 A stragiudizial made on her behalf (I-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Attilio Centon, Busta 3904) after the start of Lent 1707 cites her contract
of the preceding 10 September to sing at San Fantin throughout the recently ended season. She was to receive 150 ducats in three installments
 50 ducats after four performances of the first work, 50 ducats during the first week of January, and 50 ducats before Giovedi Grasso 
as well as a free box. After learning her part for the second opera (apparently Vindice la pazzia della vendetta, 1707/8, for which she is not

272 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 404; Groppo 408; Wiel 50; Alm 536, 537

1706/5 Paride in Ida Music adapted from Luigi Mancia by Ag. Bon. Colletti!
[PARIS ON MT. IDA]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Mazzari'

Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's?)

With balli'' and the intermezzi Lesbina e Milo SORTING DATE: 1706-11-15~
& Without dedicatee

While pregnant, Hecuba, the wife of King Priam, had a dream which was interpreted to mean that the
child to whom she would give birth would destroy Troy. Asa child, her son Paris was therefore exiled
to the countryside, where, as he grew to maturity, he grew accustomed to cavorting with nymphs.

Oo Paride was first produced in 1687 in Hanover, where Mancia worked briefly as a singer. Colletti's
revisions were originally made for a performance given in Parma in 1696.' The title-page of the libretto
identifies the period of performance as autumn 1706. It is likely to have opened in mid-November,
following the customary practice of this theater. It was produced in 1719 in both Padua and Bologna.

 On October 15 the Mantuan agent Muzio Francesco Cremona summoned the virtuose Margarita Farnetti
and Teresa Frigieri to leave Mantua for the next production at Sant' Angelo. This summons is the only
clue to the cast, since no names appear in the libretto or score.' The balli are unusual in that they seem
to be for soloists  in one case for a young shepherd (representing Paride?) and in the other for a young
Moorish woman (representing Nerina) who dances in many styles.

fi Score in GB-Lbl (Salzdahlum, 1697'%)
Listed as Bonlini 403; Groppo 407; Wiel 48; Alm 535

1706/6 Sidonio Music by Antonio Lotti
[SIDONIOS]
A dramma per musica (5) Text attributed to Pietro Pariati
rM Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1706-11-20~
a Dedicated to the protectors of the theater'

cited in the libretto), she discovered that Renier Foscarini had transferred the theater management to Francesco Tasso. She was therefore seeking,
the second and third installments from Tasso.

 & work of the same title given in Mantua in 1704 was set to music by Caldara and Quintavalle. Mancia, who may have been from Brescia,
moved often between various places in Germany and Italy. He had briefly served the Spanish vice-regal theater in Naples (1698-1701?) and
in 1708 would accompany the Venetian ambassador to London. This was one of only two works by him to be produced in Venice, but several
of his other works were modeled on texts previously used there. The dedication of the libretto to /figenia (1707) suggests that Coletti alone
set the music.

'90 Mazzari had been principally active in recent years in Mantua.
'' Including one to a song in German.
'2 | owell Lindgren, Mancia in NGDMM/2.

3 He also advised the duchy that Nicolino Ciccolino [Nicola Grimaldi], for whom he sought 24 Jire in travel expenses, should depart for
Venice immediately (I-MAas, AG, Carteggio, Busta 1586, letter of 15 8bre [ottobre] 1706, f. lv: Hieri sera scrissi al Signor Vivarelli, che
potevano partire le due virtuose Farnetti, e Frigieri per questa recita di S. Angelo, e quando quella mia spediz:e non fosse geste, Vostro Signora
Illustrissima potra preverirne l'avviso ad' effetto si dispongliono alla partenza. Cosi prepara Vostro IIlustrissima a consegnare al musico Nicolino
Ciccolino le consapute lire 24 mentre deve ancor lui venire). The first two singers cannot be linked with other Venetian operas. Grimaldi
was to sing in Mitridate Eupatore (1707/3) at San Giovanni Grisostomo.

4 As Gl'amori di Paride ed Ennone in Ida. Salzdahlum is the palace which was then occupied by Anton Ulrich (1633-1714), Duke of Brunswick-
Liineburg.

Literally, i protettori.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 273

ad Argene, the queen of Cyprus, was so crushed by the death of her husband, Morastos, that she vowed
that her daughter Dorisbe should wed only the person who could produce the head of his murderer,
Sidonios. A stand-in, posing as Sidonios, made the ultimate sacrifice, thus enabling the villain to claim
Dorisbe for himself. The subject had been used at San Moise in 1642,'* a point stressed in the dedication.

Oo The title-page of the libretto is dated autumn 1706. The production is likely to have opened in mid-
to late November. This period of time was dominated by political concerns and few foreigners were
in town, perhaps accounting for the in-house dedication. Francesco de Grandis sang in the title role
with Domenica Pini as Dorisbe. Santa Stella (Argene), the future wife of Antonio Lotti, made her Venetian
debut in this work. Other notable members of the cast included Santa Marchesini (Grimora) and Gio.
Battista Cavanna (Erbosco), soon to be an intermezzo team.'%

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 405; Groppo 409; Wiel 45; Alm 538

1707/1 L'Ifigenia Music by Agostino Bonaventura Colletti
[IPHIGENEIA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Aurelio Aureli, Pietro Riva'
M Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1707-01-04
& Without dedicatee

In Greek mythology, Iphigeneia was the first-born daughter of Agamemnon. To placate the goddess
Diana, who was angry about the killing of a hart, her people prepared to offer Iphigeneia in sacrifice.
This account involves messages from an oracle requesting the presence of one hundred virgins. The
action takes place on the day of the intended sacrifice.

Oo@ While /figenia is said to have opened on 3 January 1707 (M, NV), it is more likely to have opened on
the 4th. The libretto carefully delineated the character of each of the figures. Agamemnon was a father
tender to the point of extremity regarding his oldest daughter. Achilles was a fiery, impetuous, and
passionate man. Diomedes (the name given to Achilles' friend Patroclos in order to suit the music)
was of a sweet and faithful nature, while Iphigeneia is magnanimous and constant, Eriphyle
ferocious and resolute, while Deidamia was suave and amorous.

Ai No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 406; Groppo 410; Wiel 63; Alm 539

1707/2 Taican, re della Cina Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini
[TAIKANG, KING OF CHINA]

A tragedia per musica (5) Text attributed to Urbano Rizzi

mM Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)

'6 The work, set by Francesco Melosio, was called Sidonio e Dorisbe. The current work had some resemblances to Caldara's Argene (1689)
on a text by P. E. Badi (see Suppl. 7).

'7 It may be this coincidence which caused Bonlini (Le glorie, pp. 149f) to append to his entry on Sidonio a general comment on the rise of
the comic intermezzo. He recounted that around the middle of the [seventeenth] century, when musical talent was not yet plentiful, comedies
and [other] texted works (opere) were often presented in recitative, with a prologue and intermedi set to music.... The intermedi lost favor
Gust as they seem to be doing today)...as drammi musicali of a serious nature rose to the fore. [In the original: Verso la meta del caduto
secolo, quando il genio alla musica non era ancora si universale, si rappresentavano spesso comedie, ed opere in recitativvo, adornate con
prologo, ed intermedi in musica, per maggior allettamento degl'ascoltanti. Ma da che i drami musicali con tanta gara hanno incominciato a
comparire per ogni teatro, e che il serio ha tolto la mano al giocoso, gl' intermedi hanno perduto totalmente l'applauso, come pare, che lo cadano
perdendo anche al giorno d'oggi....

'%8 Iphigeneia was the subject of numerous tragedies, including that of Lodovico Dolce in the early sixteenth century (cf. Riccoboni, Histoire,
p. 102). A note to the reader of the libretto acknowledged that the text lay buried in the ashes of the poet until it found its way into the hands
of the theater's owners in this year.

274 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

With Lisetta e Astrobolo;' balli SORTING DATE: 1707-01-04

[ay Without dedicatee
The rules of succession in a polygamous kingdom were at issue in this libretto. The king of China had
seven wives, one of whom was the official empress and producer of legitimate successors, while the
other six were mere queens. He also had numerous mistresses. Taikang is said to have been the son
of the newly deceased emperor Vamblie and the empress Gemira, who was herself foreign-born. A
subplot explored the relationship between China's two nobilities  one of letters and one of arms.
The outlines of the text were said to rest on the writings of the Portuguese historian Samedio.

o Taican was first performed on 4 January 1707 (M, NV). Francesca Vanini Boschi sang in the title role,
with Santa Stella as Gemira, Maria Domenica Pini as the Moghul princess Elmirena, Francesco de Grandis
as King Zeliano of Japan, Nicola Pasini as a man-of-letters (Mitrane), and Domenico Tollini as a man-at-
arms (Sunone). Giuseppe Maria Boschi, a soon-to-be popular bass, debuted as Ruteno.!

BO Chinese motifs formed part of the visual spectacle, starting with the pagoda-like palace shown on the
frontispiece. Gemira's chamber in Act I was adorned with Chinese pictures; the Great Wall was featured
in Act Two, and golden dragons were featured in the fifth act. The work was situated in Peking. The
dances, choreographed by Monsieur l'Eveque of Mantua, were for Indian Moors, for temple priests,
and for the Chinese nobles at Taikang's coronation. The printer added a note to the text stating that
in order to allow time for the ridiculous intermezzi, all the lines of text with marginal markings will
be omitted. He refers to the already well established use of vergole (quotation marks) in printed libretti
to indicate passages which the poet provided for the drama but which would be omitted in performance.
Such omissions more commonly affected recitatives than arias.

A Aria published in London, 1711
Listed as Bonlini 407; Groppo 411; Wiel 56; Alm 540

1707/3 Il Mitridate Eupatore Music by Alessandro Scarlatti?
[MITHRIDATES EUPATOR]
A tragedia per musica (5) Text by Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti
i Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1707-01-05
& Dedicated to Adam Heinrich, Count of Steinau?

' See the comments on China and Gnagnaro in Suppl. 4a.

20 The name Taikang belonged to a legendary king of the Xia Dynasty (c. 1700 B.C.), an emperor of the Jin Dynasty (280-89), and an administrator
(1074-82) under Tao Tsung. Other possible transliterations of Taican include the names Taizong (belonging to seven emperors of various
dynasties) and Taichang (held by three emperors). Polygamy was widely practiced among Chinese rulers over much of recorded history. Two
nobilities was a topical issue in diverse chapters of the histories of Russian, India, Japan, and China as well as ancient Europe. In sum, the
name Taican may not relate to any precise historical figure. If it does, the Jin Dynasty figure is a likely candidate. Note, however, that another
opera ostensibly based on Chinese history, Teuzzone (1707/15), concerns the eleventh century.

?' Boschi also became a mainstay of the ducal chapel, from which he was lured to Dresden, together with Antonio Lotti, in 1717. From Dresden
he went to London (1720). In 1723 he was permanently dismissed.

2 The Florentine Zenone Angelo Rossi is credited with the scenery design.
203 Cf, Suppl. Se.

204 The celebrated composer Alessandro Scarlatti (1660-1725), having left Naples upon its occupation by the Austrians earlier in the same
year, had been recently appointed maestro di cappella at Santa Maria Maggiore, Rome. He was also currently serving as maestro of the Venetian
Cardinal Ottoboni. In 1709 he was persuaded to return to Naples by Vincenzo Grimani, who was appointed viceroy in 1708.

25 The count, a general of the imperial forces, was from Augsburg. He served in the Morea in the 1690s and in 1698 had wanted to resign
from the service (Cole, Memoires, p. 9). In 1695 and 1706 he was also working for the Venetian government (A-Wn, CO, dispatches of 26
Novembre 1695 and 13 Febraro 1706).

oe)

1707/4

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 275

Mithridates Evergetes, king of Pontos, was assassinated in a plot involving his wife, Stratonica, and
her lover, Pharnakes. He was succeeded by his son Mithridates Eupator,? whose reputation for violence
was legendary. In this account Pharnakes is spared but Stratonica is murdered. The work contained
two dances featuring Egyptian women. A compulsive essayist, Frigimelica-Roberti adorned his
commentary here with quotations from Petrarch and Ariosto. He claimed that the situation of Mithridates,
Stratonica, and Pharnakes would be recognized as a disguised version of that of Orestes, Clytemnestra,
and Aigisthos. Who knows, he pondered, whether the perfection of opera can be equal to the perfection
of thought?

A license to print the libretto was issued on 30 November 1706. Mitridate was first performed on 5
January 1707 (M, NV). A pastiche based on Frigimelica-Roberti's text was given in Reggio in 1723.
This and the two preceding works suited their audiences (among which there were said to be many
cavalieri oltramontani), to perfection in their opening performances. Regarding the preparations for
the work, a plea on behalf of the damas venezianas was made during the previous May by the prince
of Santo Buono through the offices of the Mantuan resident, Count Cremona, to have el Virtuoso Nicola
Grimaldi sing at San Juan Chrisostom.* Extensive negotiations were also required for the
participation of Diamante Scarabelli and the oboist Monsieur de Noie, both in the employ of the prince
of Vaudemont. These negotiations may account for the long gap between the issuance of a license
to print the libretto and the first performance.

Scores in B-Br; D-B; F-Pn;" arias in B-Br; GB-Lprivate

Listed as Bonlini 408; Groppo 412; Wiel 59; Alm 541

Il trionfo dell'innocenza Music by multiple composers
[THE TRIUMPH OF INNOCENCE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Rossi
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1707-01-05~
Without dedicatee

This revised version of Pericle in Samo (1701/4) opened during the first week of January 1707. Its
inadequate preparation became the basis for litigation."' The action has moved to Samos, but in most
respects the work is the same as its predecessor. The cast, unnamed in the libretto, may have included
Zanetta Steffani.?!?

Arias in A-Wn; B-Br

Listed as Bonlini 409; Groppo 413; Wiel 67; Alm 542

206 Eupator meant noble born, in contrast to Evergetes (Euergetes), which referred to someone who did good works.

20 The main thread of the of the story is found in the Rossini/Freschi Silla (1683), but the contextualization is entirely different here.

208 |_MAas, AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1586, entry of 12 Mayo 1706. Carmine Nicola Caracciola, the prince of Santo Buono, was the

Spanish ambassador to Venice. Further on the negotiations, see 1706/5.

20 |-MAas, AG, Carteggio, Busta 1586, letters of 4 and 11 September and 8 Decembre 1706 from Gio. Carlo Grimani to the duke of Mantua.

210 Facs, edn. in DMV, xi. The score in F-Pn contains cues in French possibly provided by the oboist Monsieur de Noie (my thanks to Michele

Cabrini for calling my attention to this markup).
21! T_Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Attilio Centon, Busta 3904.

22 For more information on Steffani, see the commentary on La Fillirosa (1706/4).

276

1707/5

"I

1707/6

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

La fede tra gl'inganni Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni?
[FIDELITY BETRAYED AND VINDICATED]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1707-01-29

Dedicated to John Austen and Crew Offley?"*

The plot framed the conflict between Pontos and Mycenae as the amorous betrayal of Flerida, a princess
of Pontos who was disguised as Attalos, by Pheraspes/Feraspe, a prince of Mycenae."

La fede opened on 29 January 1707 (NV). We are informed that cavalieri oltramontani*"* arrived in
Venice on 15 January 1706 M.V. and that the official opening of Carnival occurred on the 26th (M).
Running until 8 March, this Carnival period was the longest since 1666, which suggests why there was
time for two printings of the libretto,! a practice which had become rare. Perhaps demonstrating its
origins as a work intended for performance in Rovigo, the first version was quite short"* and requires
only five characters. The absence of incidental items indicates that this was a low-budget production.
The second version was apparently intended to augment its stature.

Marino Rossetti's preface to the first libretto extols the virtues of English patrons. He praises the military
and civil virtues of the nation, the riches and illustrious actions of the citizens, and the perfection of
their studies and travels. The printer's note explains that the libretto was written during the youth of
its author and that it was given in Rovigo for the entertainment of the nobility, which is usually
accommodated there for a few days in the autumn. Although the author is now at a distant location,
the composer has prepared the work for the current Carnival. Of course he had to think of its preparation
not for the restraints of the situation in Rovigo but for the vastness of the audience in Venice.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 411; Groppo 415; Wiel 64; Alm 544

Il trionfo della liberta Music by Alessandro Scarlatti
[THE TRIUMPH OF FREEDOM]

A tragedia per musica (5) Text by Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1707-02-05
Without dedicatee

Tarquinius Superbus was the last king of Rome. Junius Brutus, the son of Marcus Junius, was falsely
considered to be mad and was left to languish for twenty-five years. The plot concerns the conflict which
evolved between the three sons of the first and the two of the second, which extended to members of
successive generations. The Romans were ultimately to gain their liberty from monarchy at the cost
of irreversible damage to these relations. Frigimelica-Roberti's libretto contains a substantial rationale,
citing numerous variations and refinements of the plot as well as a poetic notice which carefully
underscores the elements within the story which contribute most to its merits as a tragedy. As in previous

28 This work appears to be distinct from the score for an opera prepared by Albinoni in the winter of 1706-7 but said to lack not only the textual
underlay but also an assigned text (I-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti A. Ciola, Busta 4026, notarial complaint of 14 marzo 1707, cited in Vio,
Conoscenza, p. 120).

24 English aristocrats. John Austen became first baron of Derhams (Middlesex) in 1714. Crew Offley addressed a speech advocating Protestant
unity to the queen in 1710. The dedicatees' presence in Venice may have been prompted by the anticipated public entry of Charles Montagu
as British ambassador to Venice.

25 A Ithough the singers are not identified in the libretto, they may have included those named in connection with Paride in Ida (1706/5), which
had been given at Sant' Angelo.

216 4 common designation for English visitors, even though strictly it could apply to anyone from north of the Alps.

2!7 Sartori Nos. 9901 and 16814 (Nuova aggiunta al dramma intitolato La fede tra gl'inganni). Rossetti, the publisher of the original libretto,
is not mentioned in the second, which was sold by Gio. Battista Chiarello all'insegna del Lion.

2!8 The libretto contains 48 pp, as opposed to the usual 60-70.

OO wx

1707/7

O

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 277

writings of this kind, he emphasizes the roles of contrasting passions and horrors. He appeals to the
audience's indulgence in the intelligence of the drama. Perhaps to demonstrate how well his plot
observed prescribed conventions of tragedy, he enumerates in his preface its action, direction, conflict,
mode of overcoming [the conflict], place, [and] time.

Il trionfo opened on 5 February 1707 (NV),' when it was received with universal applause (M).
De Blainville, who attended a performance on 6 March 1707, described it as very magnificent, the
Decorations fine, and the performers outdid even themselves in the Execution.! Like Mitridate, II
trionfo had several mute roles. Although the work included eight principal roles and five mute ones
(all of them explained in considerable detail), the performers were not identified. Bellicose aspects of
the plot were emphasized by the sets and baili. In the final act Mars descended from Heaven to take
possession of the Campus Martius consecrated to him.

Arias in A-Wn; B-Br; GB-Lprivate;? I-Rvat

Listed as Bonlini 412; Groppo 416; Wiel 58; Alm 545

Achille placato Music by Antonio Lotti
[ACHLLES PLACATED]

A tragedia per musica (5) Text attributed to Urbano Rizzi
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Melissa,* Dragontana e Policrone, balli SORTING DATE: 1707-02-05
Without dedicatee

Although the wrath of Achilles was legendary, he made peace with Agamemnon in the tenth year of
the Trojan War. As this work opened, smoke rose from the ashes of Troy. According to the libretto
it was the poet's intention not to distract the audience with alien events in the principal action. He
emphasized elements in the character of each role (e.g., the weakness of Menelaus in pardoning Helen)
as highlights of the drama. He particularly noted how after her death, Helen was transformed into the
vapors of the borasco blowing over the sea and notes that in later Greek legends it was these winds
which protected the Greek army in its exploits in Asia.

Achille opened on 5 February 1707 (BG) as the third opera at San Cassiano. Its opening performance
was attended by the duke of Mantua and by Jacques-Vincent Languet, the count de Gergy, who was
a French envoy at the time. The entourage appears also to have included some of the duke's Elboeuf
in-laws. The work produced universal satisfaction (M). The size and distinction of the cast were notable.
There were nine singing roles and two mute ones in addition to the two roles of the intermezzi. Giuseppe
Maria Boschi sang as Agamemnon, with G. B. Roberti as Menelaus, Francesco de Grandis as Ulysses,
and Santa Stella as Helen. The intermezzi called The Ruins of Troy [or Dragontana e Policrone] obviously
suited the work well. A note in the libretto indicates that in order to provide time for these ridiculous

intermezzi, it was necessary to eliminate all lines of text preceded by quotation marks.

Score in B-Br;* arias in GB-Lprivate (terza)

Listed as Bonlini 413; Groppo 417; Wiel 52; Alm 546

21 The basis of the indication in NGDMM/2 that it opened on 11 February 1707 or thereabouts is undetermined.

220 The Mercurio says only (on the 12th) that this work opened 1'altra sera.

21 Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 56.

222 Twelve arias from this work were taken to England by William Blathwayt (d. 1717), former Secretary of War in Great Britain. See Gibson,
Royal Academy, p. 61.

3 Also known as the /ntramezzi ridicoli (see Suppl. 4 for more information on the multiple names of various intermezzi). Not reported by
Groppo to have been performed with this work, but a manuscript text is in I-Vnm, Cod. It. 1V-1991 (= Dramm. 904.14).

224

Or Le rovine di Troja.

225 Facs, edn. in DMV, x.

278 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1707/8 Vindice la pazzia della vendetta Music attributed to Girolamo Polani
[Madness VINDICATED BY REVENGE]
A favola pastorale Text by Bartolomeo Pedoni'
mM Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1707-02-05~
& Dedicated to Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua

The primary emphasis of this short pastoral was on the magical properties of Arcadian poppies and
the love affairs of the mad Clopeus. Its other characters were stocks of the pastoral trade  Clori,
Mirtillo, Fileno, Silvio, Amarilli, and Laurilla. The librettist emphasized the need to adapt the work
toasmall theater. Unusually for San Fantin, the cast members were identified. They included Giuseppe
Bassani (C/opeo) and Diana Vico (Mirtillo), who were relatively well known.

 Licenses to print libretti for this work?* were issued on both 31 January 1707 (the date on which the
dedicatee's exile from Mantua formally commenced) and 27 January 1708. The exiled duke had settled
in Padua (with 150 of his best horses) by 12 Febuary 1707 (BG). The correct year of first performance
has to have been 1707 because La virtit trionfante was authorized for production at San Fantin at virtually
the same time in 1708. This leaves the second license without any clear rationale, apart from the
possibility that La virtu was poorly received and by way of replacement, a revised version of Vindice
la pazzia was considered.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 414; Groppo 418; Wiel 65; Alm 547

 1707a Chi pitt sa manca sa. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

 1707b Serenata for the Public Entry of the British Ambassador. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

1707/9 Armida abbandonata Music by Giovanni Maria Ruggieri
[ARMIDE ABANDONED]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With intermezzi SORTING DATE: 1707-11-10

& Dedicated to Nicole Cornaro and Francesca Soranzo, NN.VV.2

While these tales of Armide from the First Crusade were derived from Tasso's Gerusalemme liberata,
the emphasis here was disproportionately on magic, enchantment, and visual distortion. Gothic staging
would become a hallmark of Sant' Angelo's productions in the years ahead. A haunted palace was
substituted for the isole fortunate, Erminia appeared as an Amazon. The religious orientation of the
final scene seems to have been intended to placate censors wary of tales of magic. The work opened
in a grotto under a river bed, where Philomachus clandestinely cast his spells. The librettist claimed
that this was the first entirely amorous opera to be seen in the past twenty years, which had been marked
by heroic works.

OO Armida was first performed on 10 November 1707 (M, NV, BG). The libretto had been dedicated on
the 8th. Maria Anna Garberini Benti (La Romanina), who was to achieve later stardom as the lead
in the Metastasio/Sarri production of Didone abbandonata (Naples, 1724), made her Venetian debut

226 Pedoni seems to have worked at San Fantin in the 1707-1708 season only.

7 The magical properties may allude to the smoking of opium, which is occasionally mentioned in the context of feasts in remote villages
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

8 As a favola pastorale entitled Amore stuzzicato.

 The duke was physically present in Venice on 12 February 1706 M.V. (M, NV). From his place of exile in Padua, the duke visited Venice
in late April/early May and September 1707 (M), but his health was in decline. He died on 5 July 1708. His expected date of arrival is also
cited in GB-Lpro, SPV, Ser. 99, Box 57, Part 3, f. 483.

?5 A procurator and his wife. The performance was probably also attended by one of the princes of Brunswick (BG).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 279

(in the title role), as did Francesco Bernardi (II Senesino), who appeared as both Ronald (Rinaldo)
and Tancred. Tomaso Fabris, from the ducal cappella at San Marco, also took two roles  those of
the cavalier Rambald and the magician Philomachus/ Filomaco. The role of another cavalier, Ubald,
was filled by Lucia Bonetti. The Mantuan resident Francesco Ferdinando Galvani wrote to the ailing
duke of Mantua, enclosing a libretto for the work, that it has more acclaim than those at the other theaters
[because] the previously mentioned Romanina' [Maria Anna Garberini Benti] has a stage presence
superior even to that of the famous Margheritina Salicola of Saxony.*3!
A Arias in D-MUs; GB-Lbl, Lkc, Ob
Listed as Bonlini 415; Groppo 419; Wiel 61; Alm 548

1707/10 Anfitrione Music by Francesco Gasparini
[AMPHITRYON]
A tragicommedia per musica (5) Text by Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With Erighetta e Don Chilone** SORTING DATE: 1707-11-12
Dedicated to Ernst August, Duke of Brunswick?
coo) Pariati credited Plautus with the skeleton of this fable about Amphitryon and Jupiter. He said that his

mixture of the serious and the ridiculous  to create a tragicommedia  was made in imitation of
the ancient dramatist's work. He noted Moliere's setting of the same tale and credited it as the source
of the added role for Cleantha. Jove was disguised as Amphitryon, Juno as Doris/Doride, who posed
in the masculine costume of Eurymenes. Anfitrione was first performed on 12 (BG) or 13 November
1707 (M, NV). Antonio Tosi, then protected by the Elector Palatine, sang in the title role. Santa
Marchesini and Gio. Battista Cavanna, who provided the intermezzi, had legitimate roles in the opera
(as Cleanta and Sofia). The Boschi (Francesca Vanini and Giuseppe) sang as the gods Juno and Mercury.
A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 417; Groppo 421; Wiel 53; Alm 550

1707/11 La Rosilda Music by Girolamo Polani
[ROSILDA]
A favola in musica Text by Bartolomeo Pedoni
mM Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1707-11-14
& Dedicated to Christian Cole?
Oo The subject of this short work came, hypothetically, from Iberian history: Leodoro, a prince of Castile,

was married to Rosilda, a princess of Toledo. They decided to see the world and travel to the Adriatic.
The adoption of disguises precipitated various intrigues. The final scene took place on the banks of

come che questo drama, ha pit [1 v] grido di tutti gli altri teatri cantando la mentovatagli Romanina con una attione superiore ancora alla famosa
Margheritina Salicoli di Sassonia. According to Groppo (MS, p. 158), two members of the cast were misidentified and a new cast list was
reproduced on a loose sheet.

2 According to Strohm (Opernarien, ii, 152) the work performed was Melissa. Wiel (Teatri, p. 14) reports the intermezzi as those for Griletta
[spelled Friletta, an error reproduced by Mamczarcz] e Chilone.

5 The title-page identifies Ernst August, Duke of Brunswick, as the dedicatee, but he had died in 1698. He was succeeded by Georg Ludwig

(from 1714 George I of England). Georg Ludwig's younger brother was Prince Ernst. It was he who, at an undated meeting in Venice (generally
supposed to have been contemporaneous with the production of Agrippina, 1709/12), suggested that Handel take a position in Hanover (see
Deutsch, Handel, p. 28). The intended dedicatee could have been either Duke Georg Ludwig or Prince Ernst. It is possible that the text was
written for Brunswick, but the earliest trace of Pariati is in Spain in 1695, and he had no known connection to that court at any time.

4 Secretary to Charles Montagu, the earl of Manchester, who had made his public entry on 21 September, with much feasting (I-MAas, AG,
Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 1586, document of 24 7bre 1707). Many details of the ceremony are given in Cole's own Memoires, p. 9.

280

1707/12

aXe)

1707/13

1B



A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

the Brenta. Licences to print the libretto were issued on 8 and 14 November 1707 (M). Pedoni praised
Polani's virtuously tempered music in his note to the reader.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 416; Groppo 420; Wiel 66; Alm 549

Il selvaggio eroe Music by Antonio Caldara
[THE HEROIC SAVAGE]

A tragicommedia eroica-pastorale (5) Libretto attrib. to Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1707-11-20
Without dedicatee

Although it exhibited his usual careful intentions, this text was something of departure for Frigimelica-
Roberti. Itmixed comic and tragic roles as well as pastoral and heroic ones because, he observed, people
are always looking for something new. The principal figures were Gargore, an Andalusian prince, his
daughter Gelinda (who was erroneously believed to be unmarried), and her son Abydos/Abide, who,
believed to be illegitimate, was raised in the wild by hunters. Alarda became his beloved.

II selvaggio was first performed on 20 November 1707, when it was enjoyed by Theresa Kunegunda
Sobieska, the electress of Bavaria ( M), and Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, the duke of Mantua (NV). Anton
Francesco Carli sang as Gargore, with Santa Stella (Gelinda), Diamante Maria Scarabelli (Alarda),
and Nicola Grimaldi as Abydos/Abide, (the savage hero of the title). The doge had intervened to
secure Grimaldi's services for San Giovanni Grisostomo (M) after the singer was recruited to appear
in England.

The work opens with a royal hunt and proceeds with a series of outdoor scenes. Each act contains a
ballo. The dancers depict by turns wild beasts of the forest, various nations in the service of the king,
and courtesans who dance with savages to celebrate the wedding of Abydos with the princess Alarda.
Arias in D-MUs; GB-Lbl, Lkc, Lpr (prima), Ob

Listed as Bonlini 418; Groppo 422; Wiel 57; Alm 551

L'amor generoso Music by Francesco Gasparini
[GENEROUS LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With Melissa schernita e vendicata SORTING DATE: 1707-12-01

Dedicated to Girolamo Delfin, N.V.*

Aldan, a Danish prince and brother of king Frealaf/Frilevo, was raised anonymously in the Norwegian
court. As a young man he fell in love with the Danish princess Girita but was required by duty to marry
Alvilda, the newly ascendant queen of Norway. Alvilda, a former warrior, recognizing the true reasons
for the union, imprisoned Frealaf and installed Aldan on the Danish throne. Portions of the text were
reused in La fede in cimento (1730/2).

L'amor generoso was first performed on 1 December 1707, when it was enjoyed by Theresa Kunegunda
Sobieska (M) and numerous imperial and Hessian officers (NV). This text was set the following year
by Giuseppe Orlandini and Rocco Cerruti for performance at the Cocomero (Florence) in October. Zeno
wrote on 9 December that L amor had already opened with public sympathy, even though it was
the product of only a few days' work. The principal roles were taken by Antonio Tosi (Aldano),
Giuseppe Maria Boschi (Frilevo), Francesca Vanini Boschi (A/vilda), and Maria Domenica Pini
(Girita)?

235 Overseer of Terrafirma (i.e., the mainland of the Veneto).

236 To Antonio Muratori in Modena, 9 Dicembre 1707: ... gid uscita con pubblico compatimento, benche sia lavoro di pochi giorni (i, 187).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 281

A Arias in D-MUs
Listed as Bonlini 419; Groppo 423; Wiel 51; Alm 552

La Partenope' Music attributed to Antonio Caldara?

[PARTHENOPE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Silvio Stampiglia**
mM Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1707-12-26

Without dedicatee

Princess Parthenope left her native island of Negroponte [Crete], an island in the Eastern Mediterranean
often visited by Venetian sailors and sometimes held under Venetian rule. Following the path of a white
dove, she founded a great settlement where it landed, on a beach of the Tyrrhenian Sea. The name of
the new city, first called Partenope, was later changed to Naples [neo polis]. This account highlights
an amorous square formed by Parthenope, who loved Arsakes (prince of Corinth), who in turn loved
Rosmira (princess of Cyprus), who loved Armindos (prince of Rhodes), who loved Parthenope. To
lessen Parthenope's interest in Arsakes, Rosmira posed as the Armenian prince Eurymenes and courted
Parthenope.

oo The Venetian production was announced in the Gazzetta di Napoli of 24 December 17077! and opened
on the 26th (NV, BG), when it pleased its audience to perfection (M). Title-pages dated both 1707
and 1708 survive. A license to print the libretto had been issued to Stampiglia on 27 September 1698.
Diamante Scarabelli sang in the title role with Santa Stella (Rosmira) and Nicola Grimaldi (Arsace).
The work opened with an impending sacrifice to Apollo, whose statue was being approached by eagles
and swans. The balli were unusually eclectic and featured courtesans and savages (perhaps recycled

from // selvaggio eroe), as well as gentlewomen and men, cicisbei,'* and peasants.

o Stampiglia's text, first set by an unknown composer for performance in Naples and Rovigo in 1699
and given in Florence in November 1701, formed the basis for Handel's Partenope (HWV 27), which
opened in London on 24 February 1730. Predieri's setting, made for the opening of the Teatro Marsigli
Rossi (Bologna) in 1710, was given in Florence in 1718 and in Bologna in 1719. One variant text called
Rosmira fedele was set by Vinci for San Giovanni Grisostomo (1725/3), and another, simply called

237 Caldara also set to music a work of the same title on a text by Giuseppe Galuppi for performance in Mantua on May 12, 1701 (Besutti,

La corte, p. 101).

238 In 1706 Stampiglia had been named imperial poet to the emperor Joseph I.

2 The production was almost certainly mounted on behalf of Vincenzo Grimani, who was soon to take up the post of viceroy of Naples. A
musical masquerade (mascherata) called La sirena Partenope had been a major event in the life of the Neapolitan aristocracy on 5 February
1696 (see Griffin, Gazzetta, Doc. 85, for 7 Febraro). The hostess of the 1696 event seems to have been Aurora Sansverino (see La gloria trionfante
d'amore [1712] and La fede ne' tradimenti [1721]). The final performance of La Partenope (27 January) was attended by Charles Montagu,
who was accompanied by General [James] Stanhope, who had just arrived from Barcelona and left for London as soon as the performance
was concluded (BG). Stanhope was to win the important battles of Almenara and Zaragosa in 1710, only to be defeated at Brihuega a few
months later.

> Runs in Rovigo (1699), Florence (1701), Mantua (1701), and Genoa (1704) had all followed the premiere given in Naples in 1699 with
intermezzi and ariettas which, according to the libretto, were excluded in the Venetian production. These exclusions resulted in a work which
was somewhat shorter than was usual at San Giovanni Grisostomo. The myth of Partenope had a long prior history and in at least one case
(Partenope liberata, ovvero Il racconto dell 'eroica risoluzione fatta dal popolo di Napoli per sottrarsi dal insoppertabile giogo de spagnuoli
by Giuseppe Donzelli, c. 1667, US-CAh MS Ital. 70) its import proposed Neapolitan independence from Spain.

*4| Griffin Doc. 172. Neapolitan interest could have issued from the debut performance there, with a dedication to the duchess of Medina Coeli,
Maria de Giron y Sandoval, the wife of the viceroy.

> In Sartori Nos. 17817 and 17818.

28 Cicisbei (literally whisperers) were noblemen who were official escorts of noblewomen in Venice. Cicisbei were unmarried (roughly
40 per cent of Venetian noblemen were unmarried in the middle of the eighteenth century). No extramarital adventures were implied by such
arrangements; they were sanctioned in wedding contracts. A cicisbeo's presence was expected at theatrical performances, church services,
and other occasions on which his charge circulated in society. It was intended to discourage flirtations and dalliances.

282 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Rosmira, was set by Vivaldi for Sant' Angelo (1738/2). In all, Partenope enjoyed more than forty
productions.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 420; Groppo 424; Wiel 60; Alm 553

1707/15  TeuzzoneTM Music by Antonio Lotti
[TAO TsUNG]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With Catulla e Lardone; Melissa vendicata; balli SORTING DATE: 1707-12-27
& Without dedicatee

The plot focuses on rights of succession through this tale from medieval Chinese history. Zidiana, a
commoner, was married to the emperor Troncone a few days before he was killed in a war with the
Tartars. Although prince Tao Tsung was his legitimate heir, Zidiana claimed that she was named
as Troncone's successor in his will. Meanwhile the captive Tartar princess Zelinda had fallen in love
with Tao Tsung and argued on his behalf. Just as Tao Tsung was to be executed, the will produced
by Zidiana was shown to be false. The action took place in Nanking.

CO Teuzzone was first performed (as the third drama) on 27 December 1707 (BG), when, like Partenope,
it suited its audience to perfection (M). The title-page is dated 1708, and the work is identified in
the libretto as the third of the season. It had been announced in the Gazzetta di Napoli of 24 December
1707. The text was set by Orlandini without change of title (Bologna, 1711; Ferrara and Genoa, 1712),
and, with the title La costanza fra gl'inganni, for performance at the Cocomero in Florence in January
1712.48 Teuzzone was probably one of the two works for which Zeno sent libretti to Magliabecchi on
11 February 1707 M.V. with the comment that both were received this year with applause. Domenico
Cecchi sang in the title role. Don Nicola Pasini, who sang in the ducal chapel, was cast as the Emperor
of China. Vivaldi set it under the original title (RV 736) for Mantua in 1719. Other composers who
set the text included Fiore (Turin, 1716),?* Feo (Naples, 1720), and Ariosti (London, 1727).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 421; Groppo 425; Wiel 55; Alm 554

1708/1 Armida al campo" Music by Giuseppe Boniventi2!
[ARMIDE IN CAMP]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani

mM Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1708-01-26

24 Groppo MS, p. 159. Wiel (Teatri, p. 15) also lists Catulla e Lardone.

45 BG mentions among notable visitors an envoy of the Elector of Brandenburg who had just arrived from Barcelona, where he paid his court's
compliments to Carlo III on his engagement to the princess of Wolfenbiittel.

24 According to the libretto Zidiana was a bride (sposa) but not a wife (moglie), the probable implication being that the marriage had not been
consummated and therefore Zidiana could not possibly be pregnant with a prospective heir. The (Central Asian) Tartar dynasty lasted from
907 to 1125. Tao Tsung ruled from 1055 to 1101.

>7 Griffin Doc. 172. (NV) mentions the work's opening but does not give a precise date. It appears that the text was set by Magni and Monari
for performance in Milan in 1706.

248 Kirkendale, Court Musicians, pp. 532f.; also R. L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 222. Remnants of Orlandini's Teuzzone were
given in Prague in 1734.

249 T ettere, i, 189.

250 According to Stieger (Opernlexikon, iii, 1196), the Turin setting was a joint effort by Fiore and Casanova (this Casanova is not further
identified).

25! Boniventi was now maestro di cappella della camera of Duke Ferdinand Carlo Gonzaga, who was living in exile in Venice.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 283
& Dedicated to (Marquis) Scipione Sacrati Giraldi*?
This character-oriented elaboration of a tale derived from Tasso's Gerusalemme liberata portrays a
hopeful Armide as she arrived in disguise (as Celinda) at the camp of Geoffrey. Ronald/Rinaldo, the
prince in command of Geoffrey's army, was an inexperienced lover but a generous prince. The libretto
was significantly different from that of Silvani's Armida abbandonata, set by Ruggieri as 1707/9.
Oo Armida opened on 26 January 1708 (NV, BG).* The title-page was dated 1707 M.V. A license to print
the libretto was issued on 12 January 1708 for 1707. The opening was announced in a report of 14
January 1708 in the Gazzetta di Napoli,TM but the libretto was not dedicated until 19 January 1707 [M.V.].
Maria Anna Garberini Benti (La Romanina) sang in the title role, with Francesco Bernardi (II
Senesino) as Rinaldo and Giuseppe Bigonzi as Goffredo.?**
A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 426; Wiel 62; Bonlini 422; Alm 555

1708/2 Alessandro in Susa Music attributed to Luigi Mancia?
[ALEXANDER IN SUSA]
A tragicomedia (5) Text attributed to Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti
mM Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli?*' SORTING DATE: 1708-01-28
& Dedicated to Karl Alexander, Duke of Wittenberg**

This account of the campaign of Alexander the Great in Susa was based, according to the librettist,
on the historical and philosophical writings of Plutarch, Diodorus, Seneca, and other ancient authors
as well as works more directly related to the theater by Euripides, Aristotle, and Terence. Frigimelica-
Roberti refrained from his usual habit of writing a long-winded treatise on the dramatic genre employed,
but the structure of the work is similar to that of its predecessors insofar as it has five acts, each concluded
by an elaborate spectacle. Albrizzi published an anonymous poetic discourse on this work in 1708.7

OO & Alessandro was first performed as San Giovanni's third work on 28 January 1708 (M, NV, BG).
General Stanhope, a special envoy of the queen of England, attended the premiere. The work ran
through the end of Carnival.*' Nicola Grimaldi, now a cavalier, sang in the title role, with Santa Stella
as Stateira and Diamante Maria Scarabelli as Candaspe. A novice, Francesco Bravo (Apelle), appears
to have been the singer killed at a festa di ballo near the traghetto San Felice on 12 February 1707
[M.V.], for he never appeared in later works. The work included dances for Persians, Indians, for
satyrs, and for courtesans at the wedding of Alexander and Stateira. A ballo for gardeners in Act Four

252 A Roman nobleman.
253 (M) mentions the opening but does not give a precise date.
254 Griffin Doc. 174.

*55 References to the casting in this work and in the slightly earlier Armida abbandonata follow those of Alm, based on the UCLA libretto
collection (US-LAu), and differ significantly from those given in Wiel, Teatri, p. 17.

256 In 1707 Mancia had accompanied the Venetian ambassador to London.

57 Groppo (MS, p. 512) claimed that the intermezzi for Vespetta e Lesbo were given for the king of Denmark with this work, but the information
seems incorrect (cf. the entry in Suppl. 4a). The king's visit fell a year later. That intermezzi were performed privately, either for the king or
for the last night of Carnival (in this or a later year), is believable.

258 An imperial general. Halle (Handel's birthplace) was in the province of Wittenberg. The duke had been present for about a month (BG).
It is likely that Theresa Kunegunda Sobieska, the electress of Bavaria, and a young prince of Liechtenstein were among the other attendees.
*5 The Discorso poetico sopra |'Alessandro in Susa.

26 Probably in the company of Charles Montagu. See A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1708, entry of 4 Febraro.

26! No ball was given in the theater on the last night of Carnival (21 February) because of bad weather (NV).

28 |_Vas, IS, Busta 914, Fasc. S. Gio. Grisostomo, letter of [15] Febraro /707, in which the singer's wife appealed to Gio. Carlo Grimani for

his wages due. The singer was said to be in the service of the duke of Mantua; the libretto does not identify this singer other than by name,
but no singer identified with Mantua was inactive in subsequent years.

284

1708/3

mM

OOo

1708/4

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

was transformed into a ballo delle nazioni. Alessandro ended with the wedding banquet for Alexander
and Stateira, which was depicted on a machine said to extend across the entire width of the stage.'
Score in D-W

Listed as Bonlini 423; Groppo 427; Wiel 73; Alm 556

Flavio Anicio Olibrio Music by Francesco Gasparini
[FLAVIUS ANICIUS OLYBRIUS]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Melissa contenta; Pollastrella e Parpagnacco > SORTING DATE: 1708-01-30~

Dedicated to Charles Montagu'>

While in Rome to liberate his sister Theodelinda from prison, Ricimer (Giuseppe Boschi), the king
of the Goths, fell in love with Placidia (Maria Domenica Pini), the daughter of the late emperor
Valentinian III. The Roman general Flavius Anicius Olybrius (Domenico Cecchi) professed love for
her in public but was privately attracted to Theodelinda (Francesca Vanini Boschi).

The performance of Flavio started around 28 January 1708, when many foreign gentlemen were arriving
in Venice (M). The title-page date was given as Carnovale dell'anno 1707. A license to print the
libretto had been issued on 12 January 1708 for 1707. It must have been one of the two works for
which Zeno sent libretti to Magliabecchi on 11 February 1707 M.V. with the comment that both were
received this year with applause. Later settings of the text, which reassumed several characters who
were highly profiled in the 1680s, included those of Porpora (Naples, 1711, as // trionfo di Flavio Anicio
Olibrio), Vinci (Naples, 1728, as Ricimero), and Bernasconi (Vienna, 1738, as La tirannide debellata).
No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 424; Groppo 428; Wiel 54; Alm 557

La virti trionfante d'amore vendicativoTM Music by Girolamo Polani
[VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT AND LOVE VINDICATED]

A favola pastorale Text by Bartolomeo Pedoni
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1708-02-05~

Dedicated to Gaetano Sessi?*

This fable [favola] featured Apollo and Amore, with Mars, Vulcan, Endymion, and other gods who
disported themselves in gardens and woods, and on hills. The librettist asked that readers appreciate
the constraints imposed on the drama by its performance in a small theater. Licences to print the libretto
were issued on 31 January 1707 and 1 February 1707 M.V., but it would not have opened until after
the feast of Santa Maria Formosa on 2 February.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 425; Groppo 429; Wiel 76; Alm 558

263 Somewhat in the manner of last night banquets (cf. Ch. 5.4).

?+4 When more than one intermezzo title is given, it indicates that as the production proceeded, the featured entr 'acte was changed.

265 The count of Manchester was a special ambassador to the Republic of Venice.

266 In a parallel development, Giorgio Gentili, a noted Venetian violinist, dedicated his Concerti Op. 5 to the duke of Manchester in 1708.

267 I ettere, i, 189.

268 Count of Castel d' Aldo (near Mantua). He was praised for his merits in law and science in the dedication.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 285

1708/5 Il cieco geloso Music attributed to Girolamo Polani
[THE BLIND MAN WHO WAS JEALOUS]
A dramma pastorale per musica Text attributed to Aurelio Aureli
M1 Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1708-10-17~
& Without dedicatee

-+> __Inthis short pastoral, the huntress Clori is in love with Ergisto, who is in love with Clori's sister Aurinda.
The libretto was dated October 1708. A license to print it had been issued on 12 October 1706 for
Gl'amanti delusi, the title under which the work was given in Rovigo (ostensibly with Polani's music)
in that year. As La ninfa bizarra it had been performed, with music by Marc' Antonio Ziani, at Dolo
in 1697. Each of the balli was choreographed for two performers. The first was intended for two
Swiss and the second for a nymph and a shepherd. In a revised version of the libretto (US-LAu
560) roles for two Arcadian peasants were added to the drama. The costumes appear to have cost 30
ducats.? The cast probably included Angela Pace (see La pace fra Pompeiani e Cesariani, 1709/2).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 426; Groppo 430; Wiel 75; Alm 559, 560

1708/6 Arrenione Music attributed to Giovanni Maria Ruggieri
[HIERON]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
mM Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1708-11-08
& Dedicated to Johann Jakob, Baron of Speringhen

OO Although the Sicilian tyrant Hieron/Arrenione was generally despised, his love was rigorously sought
by the Roman Emilia and the Carthaginian Merope. The action takes place in Syracuse. Arrenione
opened on 8 November 1708 (M, BG), the date of dedication of its libretto.? All six singers in the
cast seem to have been new to the Venetian opera stage. The Genovese Giovanni Paita made his debut
in the title role, with Anna Maria (Mariuccia) Giusti as his daughter (Linceste), Antonio Giustachini
and Anna Maria Algieri as the Romans, and Marc' Antonio Bercelli and Domenica Vittoria Albergoni
as the Carthaginians. The text was later reset by Orlandini (Florence, 1724) and by Giacomelli (Prague,
1726).2%

 During the performance of the 1 5th an unplanned on-stage, hair-pulling fight between two of the donne
[Giusti and Alieri] led to the attempted stabbing of one of them by the Venetian nobleman Bonifacio
Papafava, a supporter of the other. This unhappy turn of events marked the debut of Cristoforo Frigeri
as the theater's impresario. The box-holders filed papers with a notary concerning the interruption of

2 There could be a veiled reference here to Lorenzo Beretti-Landi, who, subsequent to his long years of service to the late duke of Mantua
(and prior contacts with San Fantin), had become a representative of the papacy to the Swiss Guard. See also the entry for Arrenione (1708/6).

270 Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti A. Ciola, Busta 4026, entry of 2.da Mensis Ianuaris 1708 [M.V.]. See the comment for 1709/2.
27| Captain of the Swiss Guard.

2? The inspiration for this story was a Sicilian despot.

273 NV mentions the opening of Orenione but dates it only as I'altra sera.

274 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 105. The name Linceste implies a person was western Macedonia.

275 T_Rvat, AS, NV, N. 157, f. 705, entry of 17 novembre 1708: Ando Domenica sera in scena nel Teatro S. Casciano il Dramma intitolato
l'Arstato [sic];  nell' atto di recitarsi giovedi sera l'altro in Sant' Angelo essendo venute a contesa, non solo con parole, ma con le mani ancora
due di quelle cantatrici, s'interpose con impegno per le parti di una delle medesime il Nobile Bonifacio Papafava, e s'avvanzo a tentare di
ferir l'altra con un stile, come segui, benche leggiermente, per la qual causa ne ha havuto fecero rimprovero dal governo, che ha pero lasciato
correre il caso per leggierezza dello stesso soggetto. Also documented from sources in I-Vas in Vio, Sant' Angelo).

286

1708/7

CO

1708/8

im



A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

the production. Algieri continued in the production but sang in only one further work of the same year.
Giusti, was replaced in this production by Santa Cavalli,? had a very limited role in future ones.
Arias in GB-Ob

Listed as Bonlini 427; Groppo 431; Wiel 78; Alm 561

Astarto Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[ASTARTOS]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Vespetta e Pimpinone; Catulla e Lardone? SORTING DATE: 1708-11-11

Dedicated to (Prince) Filippo Ercolani?

In this tale of a prince raised with a false identity, Astartos was believed to be the son of Phoeniceos,
who was secretly hostile to the reign of Elissa, queen of Tyre, with whom Astartos was in love. The
subject, which focuses on the early history of the Phoenician city of Tyre, was derived from Greek history
of the tenth century BC, mediated by the tragedies Astarto and Amalasunta of Quinault.

Astarto was first performed on 11 November 1708 (M, NV, BG). Giovanna Albertini (La Reggiana)
made her Venetian debut in the title role with a cast including Santa Stella (Elisa), Domenico Cecchi
(Fenicio), and Antonio Ristorini (Geronzio) in the main work. Gio. Battista Cavanna sang as Pimpinone
in the debut performance of Albinoni's later well-known intermezzi. Paolo Rolli's adaptation of the
text was set by Giovanni Bononcini (Rome: Capranica, 1715; London: King's Theatre, 1721).
Arias in D-MUs, SWI; GB-Ob

Listed as Bonlini 428; Groppo 432; Wiel 69; Alm 562

Sofonisba Music by Antonio Caldara
[SOPHONISBA]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1708-11-24

Dedicated to Francesco Girolamo Gravena

The ancient Numidians were divided into two camps, one headed by Syphax and the other by Massanissa.
While the Carthaginians under Hasdrubal were gaining power in Spain, Syphax and Massanissa were
both attracted to Hasdrubal's daughter, Sophonisba. Each saw the possibility of expanding his own
empire by forming an alliance with her father. Sophonisba poisoned herself to avoid becoming a prisoner
of Scipio Africanus the Elder.*!

Sofonisba was first performed on 24 (M) or 25 November 1708 (BG).* The libretto had been dedicated
on the 22nd. Diamante Scarabelli, now a virtuosa in the service of Vincenzo Grimani, viceroy of Naples,
sang in the title role of this militaristic work. It included balli for Amazons and Indians as well as that

276 See Alm, Catalog, pp. 343f.
27 Groppo MS, p. 161. Bonlini MS cites only [Vespetta e] Pimpinone.

278 Prince Ercolani was the imperial ambassador to Venice. He attended the opening performance (BG). The princess of Darmstadt, who was
en route to join her new husband in Naples, is likely to have accompanied the ambassador to at least one performance (BG).

279 Many of Geronzio's lines in Astarto are preceded by quotation marks, suggesting that they were not actually sung in performance.

26 Marquis of San Giorgio.

8! Silvani's text involves most of the roles found in Minato's Scipione africano (1664, 1677/7). Only the comic roles for Lesbo and Ceffea
have been omitted. The balli are completely changed from those of the earlier works.

2 The opening is also mentioned in NV but without a specific date.

A

 1708a
1709/1

m

OR

1709/2

OL

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 287

San Giovanni set-piece, a ballo delle nazioni. The work may have had its origins in a serenata [undated,
four scenes] given at the home of Gio. Carlo Grimani for a gathering of the Accademia degl' Animosi.*
Arias in D-MUs

Listed as Bonlini 429; Groppo 433; Wiel 72; Alm 563

Le gelosie fortunate del prencipe Rodrigo. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Il tradimento tradito Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni?
[TREACHERY BETRAYED]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Francesco Silvani by Gio. Battista Candi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1709-01-05

Dedicated to Frederick IV, King of Denmark and Norway*>

The exceptionally beautiful Eriphyle, princess of Sparta, was sought as a bride by many princes.
Eventually she was united with Dorisbe, the king of Messenia, who had once been her enemy. Santa
Cavalli of Bologna took the role of the princess with Giovanni Paita as Dorisbe. A license to print the
libretto was issued on 28 December 1708. The libretto was dedicated on the 29th, when the dedicatee's
presence in Venice was first reported (M) and when he was received by the doge.* The production
appears to have opened on 5 January 1709 (M), the first day of Carnival.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 430; Groppo 434; Wiel 87; Alm 564

La pace fra Pompeiani Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo

e Cesariani
[THE TREATY BETWEEN THE POMPEIANS AND THE CAESARIANS]

A dramma in musica' Text attributed to Aurelio Aureli
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Grilletta e Demo** SORTING DATE: 1709-01-05~

Dedicated to the Venetian nobility

The Roman populace, divided in their loyalties between Caesar and Pompey, was reunited by the death
of the latter and the intervention of Ptolemy. The characters represented in this work  the middle-aged
Caesarinus Drusus and his three children, plus the young Lentulus and his sister  were drawn from
the ranks of lesser Roman nobles. There was also a role for the hump-backed servant Bleso.

A stragiudizial of 2 January 1708 [M.V.] complained that the costumes for the second workat San
Fantin fell below expectation, both in quantity and in quality, that therefore the payment of 10 ducats
for them to Andrea Bona was reasonable (in relation to the 30 ducats which had been paid for costumes
for the autumn work), and that remedies were to be provided within three days.* This leads to the
conclusion that a scheduled opening was imminent. The singer Angela Pace (Pasi) filed a separate

28 See I-Vnm, Miscell. 1350.7 and Miscell. 2669.25. The work's roles are for Sofonisba, Massinissa, and Arsace.

28 Wiel attributes it to Polani.

85 The Danish monarch (1671-1730) reigned from 1699. At this date he was about to re-enter the war against Sweden. At issue was the much
contested duchy of Schleswig. The king was in Verona (with an entourage of 150) on 22 December 1708 and in Vicenza, where a lavish feast
in his honor was held in the Teatro Olimpico, a week later. The Venetian government spent 2,000 ducats for a regatta and feast given in his
honor on | January 1708 (BG).

28 Baschet, Histoire, p. 495.

87 The work is recommended as an opera morale in the argomento. The title-page carries no designation of its dramatic species.

288 This intermezzo (Sartori 13392; not cited in Groppo's MS emendations) was presented at San Fantin for the Carnival of 1709. See further
comments on the intermezzo under L 'Aretusa (1709/10).

2 See I-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti A. Ciola, Busta 4026, stragiudizial of 2.da Mensis lanuaris 1708 [M.V.].

288

1709/3

oo)

1709/4

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

stragiudizial against Francesco Rossi, the impresario. She acknowledged having been late for
performances after Rossi fell behind in their contractual agreement to pay her 9 Jire per performance.
She said she had grown weary of performing without recompense and complained that performing
intermezzi had not been in her contract.

Despite these acrimonious relations, the intended production may have been the most ambitious one
attempted by San Fantin. Pollarolo was by now highly esteemed, the subject was more serious than
most, and the scenery more ambitious: Peace descended in a machine (an uncommon occurrence at
San Fantin) at the end of the work. The undated dedication was signed by Rocco Commelati.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 431; Groppo 435; Wiel 77; Alm 565

Il falso Tiberino' Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[THE FALSE TIBERINUS]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Vespetta e Pimpinone' SORTING DATE: 1709-01-12

Dedicated to Benedetta, Duchess of Brunswick?

In this episode from early Roman history, Tiberinus was the cruel king of the Albans. His designated
successor was the Etruscan chieftain Mezentius/Masentio, who was in the event upstaged by Agrippa,
the son of the Alban leader Tyrrhenus/Tirreno. Agrippa took advantage of his physical resemblance
to the king to pose as him after the accidental drowning of Tiberinus.

Il falso Tiberino appears to have opened on 12 January 1709 (BG). The king of Denmark had been
taken to a rehearsal at San Cassiano on the 2nd (M). Licenses to print libretti had been issued on 29
December 1708 and 4 January 1708 [M.V.]. This work and // vincitor generoso received universal
applause, both for the musicians and for every other aspect of the production (M). The cast was an
outstanding one which included Giovanna Albertini (La Reggiana; here Agrippa), Santa Stella
(Lavinia), Maria Anna Garberini (Albina), Domenico Cecchi (Tirreno), and Francesco Bernardi
(Ascanius), as well as Antonio Ristorini (Fausto) and Andrea Pacini (Mezenio).

Arias in GB-Ob (1709)

Listed as Bonlini 433; Groppo 437; Wiel 70; Alm 567

Il vincitor generoso Music attributed to Antonio Lotti
[THE GENEROUS VICTOR]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Briani??
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli?TM* SORTING DATE: 1709-01-12

Dedicated to Frederick IV, King of Denmark and Norway

The plot, based on central European history, featured Sigismund, the king of Poland, and Premystaw,
the duke of Lithuania, as well as their children. The action took place in Warsaw. The author noted
in the libretto that he had dispensed with chronological order but that this and other blemishes should

2% Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Andrea Contarini, Busta 4061, N. 67 (item of 10 Giugno 1710). She indicates that both she and Rossi were
supposed to continue in their respective capacities during the following year.

29! Groppo (MS, p. 162) and Bonlini MS list only this one. Wiel also lists Pollastrella e Parpagnacco.

22 Formerly the Princess Palatine, now the bride of Johann Friedrich, Duke of Brunswick, Hanover, and Liineburg. On her maternal side she
was descended from the Este of Modena.

23 He signed the dedication by hand the copy held in I-RVa.
24 See the note for 1708/2.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 289

not be taken as signs of disrespect. The work seems to have been prepared in great haste compared
to works of recent years at San Giovanni Grisostomo.

oO Il vincitor appears to have opened on 12 January 1709 (BG).* A license to print the libretto had been
issued on 2 January 1708 M.V. The libretto was dated 10 January 1708. The cast included Giuseppe
Boschi (Gismondo), Anton Francesco Carli (Primislao), and Diamante Scarabelli (Cunegonda). Together
with J/falso Tiberino, this work received universal applause (M). The staging contained many trappings
generally used for tales from Roman history, including lavish regal sets and a final battle scene.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 432; Groppo 436; Wiel 74; Alm 566

1709/5 Engelberta Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni (Acts 1-3),
[ENGELBERTA] Francesco Gasparini (Acts 4, 5)
A dramma per musica (5) Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati?
mM Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Catulla e Lardone; Pollastrella e Parpagnacco;
Brunetta e BarilottoTM* SORTING DATE: 1709-01-26
& Dedicated to Frederick IV, King of Denmark and Norway

Engelberta, the daughter of the duke of Spoleto, took the emperor Ludwig II [855-875] as her second
husband. Her daughter Matilda was unjustly accused of adultery by Otto, captain of the Caesarian guard.
She was saved by and subsequently wed to Bonoso, the duke of Arles.

COe Engelberta was first performed in Venice between 26 January and 2 February 1709 (M); licenses to
print the libretto had been issued on 22 and 23 January 1709. Santa Stella sang in the title role, with
the same principal cast members as found in // falso Tiberino  Maria Anna Garberini (Metilde),
Giovanna Albertini (Bonoso), Francesco Bernardi (Lodovico), and Antonio Ristorini (Ottone). It was
given in Francesco Mancini's setting in Naples on 4 November 1709 and had a long run in Florence
at the Cocomero, opening on 25 October 1710 and continuing (with interruptions) until late January
1711. The first setting was that of Fiore (Milan, c. 1708).

A Scores in D-B (Venice); A-Wn (Naples); arias in GB-Ob; I-Tn
Listed as Bonlini 435; Groppo 439; Wiel 71; Alm 569

1709/6 Edvige, regina d'Ungheria Music anonymous
(HEDWIG, QUEEN OF HUNGARY]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Tomaso Malipiero
mM Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1709-01-26~
is Dedicated to Giovanni Battista, Count of Castelbarco*TM

255 Saunders gives the 1 0th or 11th (probably from M, which reports it a week later) in NGDMM/2. On the 16th Nicold Erizzo had planned
to give a special entertainment for the king, but the nobleman fell ill, died on the 21st, and was buried at San Martino on the 22nd. It is unlikely
that the Danish entourage attended operas on any of these dates.

2% These attributions are given in the Berlin manuscript. However, Fiore set the text for Milan in 1704 and his authorship is accepted for the
Turin manuscript (Giordano 292) in the recent catalogue of that collection (Fragala Data and Colturato, Torino, p. 523). Atypically for Venice,
Giordano 292 includes parts for recorder, trumpet, and theorbo as well as strings and continuo.

2 Bonlini (MS) cancelled the name of Pariati.
288 Or La capriciosa e il credulo. Groppo (MS, p. 162) lists only the first; Wiel (Teatri, p. 20) lists all three titles.
2 Zeno had written the text soon after that of L 'amor generoso (i.e., at the end of 1709) for performance in Milan (Lettere, i, 187).

3 The count of Castelbarco, the imperial envoy to the duchy of Mantua from 1699, became its administrator after the death of Ferdinand Carlo,
who died without issue (1708). Castelbarco's involvements with the regiment of Bayreuth, was noted in the autumn of 1708. Mantua had passed
to the Empire because of the consanguinity of the Gonzagas and the Hapsburgs, who now had growing involvements in Hungary.

290

Oo

A

 1709a
 1709b
 1709c

1709/7

mM

[a
Ow

1709/8

nM

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

The subject reflects the anxieties created by ongoing wars in Eastern Europe. Here, Ludwig, the king
of Hungary, died without male heirs. His daughter Hedwig was destined to wed the Bohemian prince
Sigismund, who eventually became the ruler of Hungary.*' The work opens on the banks of the Danube
near the city of Buda. Edvige was first performed between 26 January and 2 February 1709 (M). Apart
from Giovanni Paita (Carlo), the cast consisted largely of little-known singers, including Santa Cavalli
in the title role and Matteo Berselli as Sigismondo. This was the only Venetian work following Arrenione
(1708/6) in which the hair-pullers Anna Maria (Mariuccia) Giusti and Anna Maria Algieri sang.
No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 434; Groppo 438; Wiel 89; Alm 568

Il ritratto del grande. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
La ninfa Apollo. Cf. Suppl. 5b.

Pastoral in honor of the king of Denmark. Cf. Suppl. 6.

Il tradimento premiato Music attributed to Girolamo Polani
[BETRAYAL REWARDED]

A favola pastorale Text attributed to Giovanni Battista Candi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Ermilla e BattoTM SORTING DATE: 1709-11-03

Dedicated to Marc' Antonio and Camillo Borghese*

This short pastoral features the shepherd Tirsi, who is lovesick for the beautiful Dorinda, who loves
Silvio and eventually marries him. // tradimento was first performed on 3 November 1709 (M). A license
to print the libretto had been issued on 28 October 1709. As would be expected in a work of this kind,
the scenes were all rural and included flowered fields, a running brook, woods, and a valley between
the rocky mountains.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 436; Groppo 440; Wiel 86; Alm 570

La principessa fedele Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini
[THE FAITHFUL PRINCESS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Agostino PioveneTM
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Palandrana e Zamberlucco*TM SORTING DATE: 1709-11-10

Dedicated to the ladies of Venice

The Bohemian princess Kunegunda was about to be wed to the German prince Rudolph when he was
captured and taken prisoner by an Egyptian soldier. Disguised as an Egyptian man, the faithful Kunegunda
sailed to Africa to liberate him. She was shipwrecked off the A frican coast and taken prisoner in Egypt.
Although disguised as a boy, Kunegunda so captivated the Sultan Aladdin with her music that she was

*! He is variously described as Bohemian and Lithuanian. Hungary was affected by the Austrian-Turkish wars (1683-1718), through
which Austria gained control of most of the Danube and its tributaries. A popular uprising in Hungary in 1703 was prompted by foreign alliances
arising during the War of the Spanish Succession (1701-13). The Great Northern War (1700-21), initiated by Sweden, was fought principally
in the Baltic (including Lithuania), Poland, and Ukraine.

3 Or the Primo scherzo musicale.

 Father and son. The Borghese family (from Rome) were newly arrived in Venice and intended to remain for a substantial period. They
were temporarily resident near Santo Stefano. They had attended an opera given at the autumn fair in Rovigo during the week ending 26 October

(NV).

> A Venetian nobleman (b. 1671). This text marked Piovene's debut. He continued to write libretti through 1721.
35 Groppo MS, p. 163.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 291

able to lull him into a trance and free her fiance and herself. The work opened on the banks of the
Nile.

CO La principessa was first performed on 10 November 1709 (M). Scarlatti's setting of a revised version
of the libretto opened in Naples on 8 February 1710. The cast featured Maria Domenica Pini (Cunegonda),
Stefano Romani (Ridolfo), and Gio. Battista Carboni (Aladino). Several situations in the text have loose
parallels in Voltaire's Candide (1759).

fi Arias in D-WD
Listed as Bonlini 437; Groppo 441; Wiel 79; Alm 571

1709d Larivalita senza premio nelle nozze d'Eudosia e Genserico, re de' vandali.Cf. Suppl.
3a.
 1709e Eumene. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1709/9 Ama pit che men si crede Music by Antonio Lotti
[To LOVE MORE THAN IS BELIEVED POSSIBLE]
A melodramma pastorale Text by Francesco Silvani
mM Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1709-11-23
io Dedicated to Francesco Cornaro*TM

The lovelorn shepherdess Locrine commits herself to the cult of Diana in Ephesos. Mirtillo comes there
in pursuit but falls in love with another shepherdess. Diana punishes all of Arcadia with a plague. In
this pastoral the Arcadians try to win back the favor of Diana. The poet offered this work for a happy
diversion during these few [remaining] days of autumn and promised a heroic work for Carnival. He
believed that the air of villeggiatura which hung over the present dictated the need for a pastoral work.

oo This production opened on 23 November 1709 (NV), when it was received with universal satisfaction
(M). The libretto had been dedicated on 20 November 1709. The Nuncio's report for the 30th reports
that like the works at San Casciano and Sant' Angelo, it is receiving only mediocre applause.' The
cast, led by Anton Francesco Carli (Silvano), was a strong one which included Diamante Scarabelli
(Lindori) and Margherita Durastanti (Fiordalba) in her Venetian debut.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 438; Groppo 442; Wiel 83; Alm 572

>

1709/10 L'Aretusa Music attributed to Clemente Monari*
[ARETHOUSA]
A melodramma Text attributed to Pietro d' Averara
mM Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's?)
With Grilletta e Demo SORTING DATE: 1709-11-25~
& Dedicated to Erasmus Friedrich, Count Saver

In this short pastoral, Arethousa hid from Alpheios/Alfeo, her would-be lover, on the island of Ortigia
[near Syracuse], where both met misfortune. In the main drama the intermezzo performers appeared
as the peasant Grilletta and her husband, the goatherd Demo.* In the opening scene Grilletta found

 Probably the doge's son, who had returned from an embassy in England the preceding month (NV). The Cornaro were a prominent noble
family. They held many high offices both in the government of the republic and in the church.

307 | tanto questo come quelli degli altri due Teatri di S. Casciano, e di S. Angelo riescono sin' ora di mediocre applauso (I-Rvat, AS, NV,

N. 158, f. 677).

8 Monari (c. 1660-1728), a player of the violone, passed from the service of Guido Rangoni in Modena to that of Anton Ulrich, Duke of
Brunswick, then to the cathedral in Reggio Emilia as maestro, and finally to Forli in the same position.

 The situation of the intermezzo roles remains ambiguous. The printing ofa libretto for the work suggests its detachability, but the characters
are also integrated in the main drama. One of the performers in both the main work and the intermezzo was probably Angela Pace, on whose

292 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Arethousa wandering by herself near the sea and invited her into her hut, just as Demo was returning
from the fields singing (la fa la la la la la).

I) Printing licenses for this work, which had been given in Milan in 1703, were issued on 21 and 22
November 1709. Although the production could have opened in Advent or in the St. Stephen's season,
it is most likely to have begun in late November. In a note to the reader, the impresario G. B. Zuccato
apologized that the present circumstances did not permit so lavish a production as had been given
previously.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 439; Groppo 443; Wiel 92; Alm 573

 1709f La gara amorosa. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
1709/11 L'Endimione Music attributed to Giuseppe Boniventi
[ENDYMION]
A tragicomedia Text attributed to Francesco Mazzari
mM Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With two scherzi musicali>" and balli SORTING DATE: 1709-12-01~
& Dedicated to Livia Spinola and Flaminia Borghese?"
C8 In this pastoral, the handsome Endymion has been carried to Heaven by Jove. A contest between Jove

(representing Comedy) and Juno (representing Tragedy) ensues. As the work opens, Endymion is
descending from Heaven. A license to print the libretto was issued on 29 November 1709, and Endimione
is likely to have opened soon after.* The librettist complained that the scenery should have been
grandiose and decorous but that the physical constraints and wishes of the director precluded the
realization of these intentions. The staging emphasized dialogues between the Heavens and the Earth,
between Night and Day, and between bucolic tranquility and tempestuous storms  as well as Comedy
and Tragedy. A setting by Buini was given at the Teatro Formigliari, Bologna, in 1729.
A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 440; Groppo 444; Wiel 88; Alm 574

1709/12 Agrippina' Music by Georg Frideric Handel?
[AGRIPPINA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Vincenzo Grimani*!*
mM Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1709-12-26
Without dedicatee

legal action see La pace fra Pompeiani e Cesariani (1709/10). Alpheios was the personification of a river in Arcadia.

3! The primo scherzo was that for Ermilla e Batto, which was carried over from the previous production (// tradimento premiato), but it appears
that it was now performed by cori rather than soloists (see Suppl. 4a).

3!" Livia Spinola Borghese had been involved in a long-standing property dispute with her cousin, Felipe Antonio Spinola Colonna, the duke
of Sesto. Litigation was pursued in the Venetian courts. Flaminia was her daughter. Benedetto Marcello's oratorio Giuditta had been sung
in the Venetian home of Livia Spinola Borghese on the 27th (Selfridge-Field, Marcello, p. 360). During the same week Marc' Antonio Borghese,
the husband of Livia Spinola, had exchanged visits with the Spanish ambassador.

> By 18 November the Borghese family had taken up residence in a palace on the Grand Canal (NV).

33 Handel (1685-1759) had been in Italy for the better part of three years and had circulated primarily in Medici circles, staying principally
in Florence after an initial stint in Rome. Although he was rumored to have had an affair with Vittoria Tarquini (the mistress of Prince Ferdinando
de' Medici), she had not sung in Venice for many years and appears to have been at least ten (more probably fifteen or twenty) years older
than the young composer, for her Venetian career had begun in 1688.

>! Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 158) and Groppo (MS, p. 164) claimed that Agrippina shared with Elmiro and Orazio a common sublime source
of twenty years earlier, and Grimani's authorship is today unquestioned, although it remains unconfirmed by direct evidence.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1700-09) 293

 Nero was the fruit of Agrippina's first marriage to Domitius. The story related here was built on the
premise that after her subsequent marriage to the emperor Claudius, Agrippina was eager to secure
her son's position in the line of succession. Agrippina was first performed on 26 December 1709 (M).
Mainwaring claimed that Agrippina was performed in Venice for twenty-seven successive nights; more
probably the customary (intervening) religious and civic holidays were observed. He reported that the
theater resounded with shouts of... Viva, il caro Sassone' [Long live the dear Saxon] and other
expressions of approbation too extravagant to be mentioned.3!5

Ov Margherita Durastante sang in the title role, with Anton Francesco Carli (Claudio), Valeriano Pellegrini
(Nerone), and Diamante Scarabelli (Poppea, Nerone's mistress). According to the account of the soprano
Giorgio Stella (10 January 1710), Pellegrini was greatly praised because he is a virtuoso. Pellegrini
was to send excerpts from the work to the Elector Johann Wilhelm (Stella's employer). He obliged
with six of the most beautiful arias.*! Handel had received Grimani's libretto between early 1707
and June 1708. The figure of Claudius is now believed to have represented Grimani's nemesis, Pope
Clement XI, and the work itself is read as a satire on papal relations.*"' A revised version of the work,
with eleven new arias by Mancini, was given in Naples in February 1713.3'*

A Scores in A-Wn; D-WD (1710); GB-BENcoke, Cfm, Lbl, Mp; arias in A-Wn; D-WD; GB-BEN,

Cfm, Lbl, Lprivate, Mp; US-Cu

Listed as Bonlini 441; Groppo 445; Wiel 84; Alm 577; HWV 6

1709/13 Ciro" Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[Cyrus]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With Bertolda e Volpone;'" Galantina e Tulipano SORTING DATE: 1709-12-27
& Dedicated to Francesco Maria Pico?

Soothsayers of Astyages, the king of Media, maliciously instructed the king to give his daughter Mandane
in marriage to the commoner Cambyses. When she gave birth to Cyrus, they told him that the newborn
would one day inherit the empire. For his safety, Cyrus was raised in disguise by a shepherd and his
wife. Cyrus fell in love with the fallen leader's daughter, Bardane, and through his marriage to her indeed
ascended to the throne. The work opened in Echbathan, in a garden of palms and cypresses.

oo Ciro was first performed on 27 December 1709 (M). The title-page is dated 1710. The text was set
in 1716 by Lotti for Reggio, where Paita again sang as Astyages. Stefano Romani sang in the title role,
with Giovanni Paita (Astiage) and Maria Domenica Pini (Bardane).

A Score in D-WD (1710)

Listed as Bonlini 442; Groppo 446; Wiel 80; Alm 578

318 Mainwaring quoted in Baselt, /oc. cit.
36 A soprano, Stella served in youth as a chamber musician to Johann Wilhelm. In later years he was an agent of the elector in Amsterdam
and Venice (see Baselt, Handbuch, iv, 44f; also Deutsch, Handel, p. 28).

3"7 Baselt (Handbuch, iv, 43f.) holds that Grimani would have written the libretto prior to being Viceroy of Naples and postulates (iv, 35) that
Handel made a trip to Naples in May 1708. U. Kirkendale (Handel with Ruspoli, p. 305) has recently suggested that the work could have
been written just prior to Handel's arrival in Rome in November 1706.

*'8 The libretto (Baselt, Handbuch, iv, 60) notes that a great many of the arias have been transposed and that Mancini composed music for
tutte le scene buffe.

3 Or II nuovo mondo, Bonlini (MS) lists only [Galantina e] Tulipano.

30 The duke of Mirandola, a former administrator for the late duke of Mantua, was now in a precarious situation. In 1711 Count Cremona,
another former ally of Ferdinand Carlo, referred to Pico as the king of treason (I-Vas, IS, RC, Busta 592, undated item following 26 Marzo
1711).

The 1710s: An Overview

he Peace of Utrecht (1713) brought little relief to
E the declining fortunes of the Most Serene Repub-

lic. A year later a new war erupted in the Balkans.
Venetian holdings on the fringes of these lands were threat-
ened. Within six months the Turks had invaded the Venetian-
held Peloponnese. Under Field-Marshal Schulenburg, the
Venetians held Corfu in 1716. On the Hungarian plains, the
Empire gained ground under Eugene of Savoy. Belgrade fell
in 1717. The treaty signed at Passarowitz in 1718, which
expanded the Holy Roman Empire and assigned Sicily to
Savoy, also concretized the Republic's losses in the Aegean.

Overall, these back-to-back wars redefined the balance
of power between maritime and land-based empires. Except
for access to the Black Sea via the Danube, Austria had been
aland-locked country. As soldiers charted unfamiliar river
valleys and plains in Bohemia, Poland, the Balkans, and
Ukraine, they were impressed by novelties of geography and
topography, flora and fauna, languages and cultures. New
awareness gave rise to better maps of the sprawling interior
of the Continent, overland extensions in transportation and
communication, the rapid growth of market towns at major
crossroads, and the opening of untaxed ports. Notable among
these was Trieste, which sat directly across the Adriatic from
Venice. By 1720 the foundations of the Venetian economy
were challenged from every direction.

Librettists from the nobility found themselves distracted
by new political agendas. Apostolo Zeno abandoned his
dramaturgical pursuits to Pietro Pariati when he launched
the bimonthly Giornale de' letterati d'Italia (1710). Eight
years later he moved to Vienna as court poet. Girolamo
Frigimelica-Roberti, a pillar of dramaturgical reform in the
1690s, occupied himself with clandestine schemes for inter-
European canals and the management of espionage networks
in the Balkans. Agostino Piovene expressed his anti-Turkish
hostility in plots such as that of Zamerlano, set by Gasparini
as 1711/3. Inthe same year the government, every supersti-
tious about a lack of piety in politically delicate times,
prohibited the holding of banquets in theaters.

Peace enable distinguished visitors once again to visit
the city. The elector of Bavaria (1716) and the electoral
prince of Poland and Saxony (1712, 1716-17) were among
those most feted. In general, however, audiences became

more anonymous. A blanket induction of new nobles in 1716
paralleled the increasing tendency of librettists to dedicate
their works collectively to the ladies and gentlemen of
Venice, or simply to ladies collectively.

Impoverished by war, divested of its patrons and its
trade, the government in 1715 sanctioned more frequent
public lotto drawings. In 1717 it began to sell off the salons
of the Procuratie Nuove on the Piazza San Marco. (One
became Florian's Caffe, which still survives.) Economic
collapse led to the wholesale departure of singers, instrumen-
talists, and scene-painters for other climes, particularly
London. German princes offered positions to the Italian
performers they particularly favored. Venice continued to
produce an enormous quantity of indigenous musical talent,
but much of it was siphoned off as quickly as it was devel-
oped. The stellar example is that of Faustina Bordoni, who
made her debut in a Venetian serenata (1716) but within ten
years became a celebrity in London and Paris.

The most decisive events in theatrical life were the
deaths of Vincenzo (1710) and Gio. Carlo Grimani (1714).
In Vincenzo's absence, San Samuele began to present operas,
albeit infrequently. At San Giovanni Grisostomo, reorienta-
tion took several years. Sant'Angelo became the most
consistently active theater (Figure 24). Its vicissitudes were
bound up with the involvements of Antonio Vivaldi as
violinist and sometime impresario. Although conditions were
often chaotic, Sant' Angelo's stagecraft seems to have been
moderately well received. Despite the official reservations
of the State Inquisitors, scenes of magic and enchantment
had wide appeal. Audiences saw depictions of palaces and
gardens, storms and shipwrecks designed by Marco Ricci
as well as Bernardo Canal and his sons. Activity at San
Cassiano fell sharply with Gasparini's move to Rome. San
Moise re-emerged as an opera house at mid-decade through
its engagement of the Denzio troupe, many of whose
members were later drawn to Graz, Brno, and Prague.

Among composers, Pollarolo's activities at San Giovan-
ni Grisostomo declined. Gasparini was recruited to Rome
in 1713, Lotti to Dresden in 1717. Vivaldi was called to
Mantua at the end of the same year. Albinoni was the most
experienced composer who stayed behind. He found
supplementary work in private palaces and in the provinces.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19)

295

0 Sant'Angelo

|G San Cassiano

| @ San Fantin

|B San Gio. Grisostomo
| SS. Gio. e Paolo |
@ San Moise |
@ San Salvatore
|@ San Samuele

FIGURE 24. Comparison of works per theater in the 1700s and 1710s.

Sant' Angelo's repertory became a parade of works by little-
known, sometimes foreign composers.

The absorption of displaced singers from failed duchies,
in coincidence with the arrival of new audiences from distant
principalities, posed profound obstacles to textual under-
standing. Opera productions were forced to appeal to a
polyglot audience in textless ways. Dramaturgical messages
lost some of their cultural meaning. Virtuosity flourished.
Instrumental cadenzas and fantasies proliferated. Gifted
musicians, among them the Saxons Heinichen and Pisendel,
came to Venice to study. They also contributed to new
musical fashions, especially in matters of musical articula-
tion. Arguments about taste became rampant.

Productions during Advent were avoided entirely,
reflecting the strictness of government control. The number
of works given during the winter increased significantly. The
level of private activity at palaces and embassies was little
changed from that of the preceding decade. The rate of score
survival (18 works or 20%) is marginally improved. Polla-
rolo, Vivaldi, and Lotti are the beneficiaries.

The legate's records provide the one stable stream of
news reports of the time. Avvisi and Pallade veneta
manuscripts are preserved only for politically sensitive
periods. Owing to a temporary increase in British patronage,
the State Papers begin again to mention theatrical affairs in
parallel with an expansion of trade interests.

Opera Productions: Chronology

1710/1 Arato in Sparta Music (newly) attributed to Girolamo Polani!
[ARATOS IN SPARTA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Nicold Minato
Mr" Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1710-01-04~
& Dedicated to Prince Francesco Maria de' Medici

' See note 4. The music is otherwise attributed to G. M. Ruggieri. Regarding the attribution of both the poetry and the music to Benedetto
Marcello (by Bonlini and Groppo), see Selfridge-Field, Marcello, p. 247. Six cantatas in GB-Lbl constitute Polani's only surviving music.

2 Groppo (MS, p. 165), acknowledging that Benedetto Marcello was often said to be the poet, refrained from assigning the text toa particular
author. Allacci and Sonneck both credited Marcello with the text. Wiel assigned the text to Francesco Minato (who is otherwise unknown),
while in the New Grove Nicole Minato is indicated as the librettist (in the Ruggieri work-list compiled by Piero Weiss). This reflects the fact

that Arato in Sparta is a parody of Leonida in Tegea (1676/3).

296 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

In the third century BC, the historical Aratos opposed Macedonian influence in the Peloponnese and
freed Athens. In this fanciful account Leonidas, the king of Sparta, wished to see his daughter Almira
well-married. Hericlene/Ericlene, in pursuit of her beloved Aratos (who has assumed the name of
Rimedes), was shipwrecked off the coast of Sparta, where she discovered her husband negotiating with
Leonidas for the hand of Almira.

OOE Arato in Sparta was first performed between 4 and 9 January 1710 (M); the 4th is most probable. A
license to print the libretto was issued on 2 January 1710 for Carnevale 1709. All theaters were closed
from 26 January to 8 February by papal order.' Audiences heard Antonio Bernacchi in the title role.
Maria Angelica Bracci (Ericlene) and other singers protested to the Council of Ten on 1 March 1711
that they had not yet been paid by the impresario, Giovanni Orsato. One of the plaintiffs was Girolamo
Polani, suggesting that it was he who was the composer.*

Ai No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 443; Groppo 447; Wiel 90; Alm 579

1710/2 Le vicende d'amor e di fortunaTM Music of uncertain attribution'
[THE VICISSITUDES OF LOVE AND FORTUNE]
A [dramma] da rappresentarsi in musica Text derived from Gio. Domenico Pallavicino
i Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Grilletta e Demo SORTING DATE: 1710-01-18~
& Without dedicatee
i) This work, set in Byzantium, was a revised version of Tiberio imperatore (1702/3). The title-page of

the libretto is dated 1709, which must be old-style. It is likely to have opened around the start of Carnival
1710. The final aria provided music for a ballo.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 444; Groppo 448; Wiel 93; Alm 580

1710/3 Il comando non inteso et ubbidito' Music by Antonio Lotti
[THE COMMAND THAT WAS NOT UNDERSTOOD OR OBEYED]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1710-02-08
is) Dedicated to Karl Ernst, Count of Waldstein'

The subject of this work was Zoe, the Eastern Empress who married the Roman chancellor Argirus.
The mother of one son, Constantine, she was persuaded by her politically ambitious husband to adopt
another, Isaac. The resulting tensions made her marriage a microcosm ofa contentious political terrain.
The work opens with Zoe's coronation.

Or Il comando was first performed on 8 February 1710 (M). The libretto had been dedicated on the 6th.
A setting of the text by Francesco Gasparini was given at the Cocomero (Florence, music lost) in
November 1715. Settings given in Naples and Genoa (1713) are of unknown authorship. The cast included
Margherita Durastante (Zoe) and Diamante Maria Scarabelli (Jeodora). The balli depicted gypsies,
mad people, and genies. The audience may have included Livio Odescalchi, the duke of Bracciano,
who had just arrived in Venice to enjoy Carnival (CO).

> See BG, issue of 4 February 1710, report from Venice of | February.

*|-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 41 (1710-13), Fasc. 1710, item of Primo Marzo 1710. Polani was the composer of the forthcoming Berengario.

5 The music is attributed both to Francesco Gasparini and to Teofilo Orgiani (for Brescia, 1707) in NGDMM/2. Despite the likeness of titles,
Bertoni's Le vicende amorose (1760), claimed in Grove to be on G. D. Pallavicino's text, is a completely unrelated dramma giocoso.

 Cited in Groppo MS, p. 165.
7 The Bohemian count Karl Ernst von Waldstein (1661-1713) had been named a Knight of the Golden Fleece in 1698.

1710/4

1710/5

A

 1710a

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 297

Arias in D-WD (1710)
Listed as Bonlini 445; Groppo 449; Wiel 85; Alm 581

Sesostri, re d'Egitto Music by Francesco Gasparini
[SESOSTRIS, KING OF EGYPT]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Bertolda e Volpone'*; Galantina e Tulipano SORTING DATE: 1710-02-09

Dedicated to Fulvia Visconti'

The life of Sesostris, who reigned in Egypt in the twelfth dynasty [1970-1936 BC], was spared in
childhood, when the rest of his family was massacred by the tyrant Amasis, through the help of the
faithful satrap Phanes/Fanete. Raised as Amasis's natural son, Sesostris organized a serious resistance
to the brutal rule of Amasis.' Sesostri was first performed (as the third work of the season) on 9
February 1710 (M).'' The opera was later produced in Rome, Florence, Genoa, and Turin. This and
the preceding work were received with universal satisfaction. The cast included Stefano Romani
(Sesostri), Gio. Battista Carboni (Amasi), and Giovanni Paita (Fanete). Gio. Battista Calvi (Gambino)
performed in both the main work (as Canoppo) and in the intermezzi.

Sesostri is one of the few works for which there is proof of a /ater performance without music. Riccoboni
revised it as a dramma representativo in 1715 (supplement 3a), apparently for performance during his
last season at San Salvatore before moving to Paris.' A setting by Francesco Conti, with balli by Nicold
Matteis, was given in Vienna in 1729.

Arias in D-MUs; F-Pn (Turin, 1717); GB-Lbl

Listed as Bonlini 446; Groppo 450; Wiel 81; Alm 582

Berengario, re d'Italia Music attributed to Girolamo Polani
[BERENGAR, KING OF ITALY]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1710-02-15~

Dedicated to Giovanni Battista Durino?

Louis, the king of Gaul, sent to Arnoulf, the earl of Flanders [Germany], portraits of his two eligible
daughters, Matilda and Leonora. Jealousies between the sisters provided the basis for a series of incidents
involving marriage and deception after the death of Louis and the ascension of Charles [879-888]. Upon
Charles's death, Berengar [888-889] began the first of his two reigns.'* Berengario was first performed
between 15 and 22 February 1710 (M). The subject was related to that of 1682/8.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 447; Groppo 451; Wiel 91; Alm 583

Le disgrazie di Pantalon amante non amato. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

8 Also called J/ nuovo mondo. It is cited as such by Bonlini (MS).

 We learn from the dedication that she was from Milan.

' The plot was said to have been based on de la Grange's Amases, rois d'Egypt. The work opened on the banks of the Nile.
"' The title-page was dated 1709.
"2 See Alberti, La scena veneziana, p. 54, and Riccoboni, Reflexions, pp. 37ff.

'3 Count of Monza.

'* Berengar of Friuli, elected king in 888, was deposed in the following year, was reinstated in 898, and then sat until 922, when he was again
deposed. In 896 Lombardy was divided by Berengar and Lambert into two parts.

298 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1710/6 L'amor tirannico Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini
[TYRANNICAL LOVE]
A dramma per musica (5) Text by Domenico Lalli'
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1710-11-08
wz Dedicated to Marquis Filippo Rangoni, Count of Monza

Tiridates, the wicked king of Armenia, was married to Polyxena but had fallen in love with Zenobia,
who was married to Rhadamisthos, here described as a prince of Thrace. Wounded in the defense of
her city and taken for dead, Zenobia was thrown into a river, from which she was rescued by Tiridates'
soldiers and then imprisoned. Much of the plot hinges on Rhadamisthos's efforts to save her.'
OO L'amor was first performed on 8 November 1710 (PV), when it was received with common satisfaction
(NV). It was still running on the 22nd (M). Pallade veneta noted that Gasparini had sweetened [a text
which applauded tyranny] with his musical ideas.'' The text had been set under the title Radamisto
by Albinoni (1698/7), and an adaptation of the libretto was to be used as the basis for Handel's Radamisto
(1720; HWV 12). Gasparini's own setting may have been the one given at the Teatro Cocomero, Florence,
in January 1712."* A pastiche version by Chelleri and Porta was given ten years after that (1722/6).
A Arias in D-WD
Listed as Bonlini 449; Groppo 453; Wiel 94; Alm 585

1710/7 L' Erginia immascherata Music by diverse composers

[ERGINIA UNMASKED]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Marchi

im Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Lisetta e Grino' and a balletto SORTING DATE: 1710-11-08~

& Without dedicatee

Oo This revised version of Rosalinda, given at Sant' Angelo with music by Marc' Antonio Ziani (1692/5),
opened between 8 and 15 November 1710 (A, PV). It was revived in Rovigo in 1727.

 The Bolognese Angela Pasi sang in the title role (and as Lisetta in the intermezzi), with the Mantuan

Rosalia Rossi (Lotario), Gerolamo Santa Paolina (Amef), and the Venetian Pellizzari sisters (Antonia
and Annetta) in supporting roles. Francesco Rossi, the current impresario at San Fantin, had agreed
ina June contract to pay Pasi 9 Jire a night for her participation in both the operas and the intermezzi.
Inasarcastic note, the correspondent for Pallade veneta noted that this was an entertainment for those
who have a slender purse...since the music is accompanied by little clinking of coins.! The libretto
symbolized a style of presentation which was the antithesis of the lavish practices of San Giovanni
Grisostomo. The plot summary and the note to the reader consist entirely of short couplets.

'5 Domenico Lalli (born Sebastiano Biancardi) got his start at San Cassiano directly upon Apostolo Zeno's withdrawal to establish the monthly
Giornale de' letterati d'Italia, a few months prior to this opening. Pietro Pariati, who revised many of Zeno's texts (1710/3 et al.), also benefitted
by Zeno's reorientation.

 The basic outline is familiar both from Bentivoglio's text of Tiridate (1669/3) and from Marchi's Zenobia (1694/5).
" Pallade veneta, p. 263.

'8 See R. L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, pp. 222f.

' Cited in Groppo MS, p. 167.

?0 Rossi wanted to substitute 3 ducati grossi for the production cycle, but she insisted on payment per appearance (I-Vas, Sezione Notarile,
Atti Andrea Contarini, Busta 4061, N. 67, entry of 10 Giugno 1710).

2! Pallade veneta, p. 263.

2 The argomento reads, Se brami d'Erginia saper i casi suoi/II libro tel dira se spender vuoi, and the note to the /ettore, Ecco 6 benigno
lettore/Un parto di pieta al tuo bel core.

1710/8

cae)

1710/9

mM

Ow

1710/10

im

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 299

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 453; Groppo 457; Wiel 101; Alm 589

Isacio tiranno Music attributed to Antonio Lotti
[ISAAC THE TYRANT]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris, rev. Francesco Briani
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With danze SORTING DATE: 1710-11-24

Dedicated to John (Johann), Duke of Marlborough?

The subject here was the Cypriot tyrant Isaac, who had come to power with false credentials in the reign
of the Eastern emperor Andronicus. Many atrocities were committed in his war against the king of Sicily,
which he would have won had it not been for the intervention of a fleet of English ships which had
been blown off-course into the Limassol harbor. One ship carried Constance, the wife of the English
king Richard, who demanded revenge for her mistreatment by the Cypriots.

Isacio was first performed with grand applause on 24 November 1710 (M, A, PV). Paolo Rolli was
to adapt the text, based on English history, for Handel's Riccardo primo, re d'Inghilterra (1727; HWV
23). According to NV, the production elicited applause and satisfaction equal to that received by L amor
tirannico. Anton Francesco Carli sang in the title role with Francesco de Grandis (Riccardo), Diamante
Maria Scarabelli (Costanza), and Margherita Durastante (the tyrant's daughter, Pulcheria).

Arias in D-WD

Listed as Bonlini 451; Groppo 455; Wiel 97; Alm 587

L'ingannator ingannato Music attributed to Giovanni Maria Ruggieri
[THE DECEIVER DECEIVED]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Marchi
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1710-11-29
Without dedicatee

The plot's Roman setting concerns the reign of Domitian [81-96 AD]. The first opera to be performed
at San Samuele, L 'ingannator opened on 29 November 1710 (A, M, NV, PV), when it met with general
pleasure and applause. Marchi cited the virtues of the new theater and the selection of [unnamed]
singers in the work, while beseeching viewers to overlook the restraints imposed by time. The staging
was carefully contrived. While the outer acts provided the customary chambers, piazzas, and courtyards
expected of a Roman setting, the two sets for the second act depicted a gallery of musical instruments
(as in Nerone, 1678/8, the second work given at San Giovanni Grisostomo) and a garden of rose-covered
trellises and cedars.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 450; Groppo 454; Wiel 99; Alm 586

Non son Quella e la difesa Music attributed to Giovanni Maria Ruggieri
[I'M NOT SHE IS THE DEFENSE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giorgio Antonio Falier
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1710-11-29

3 John Churchill (1650-1722), first duke of Marlborough and baron of Churchill, distinguished himself in the battles of Blenheim (1704),
Ramillies (1706), and Oudenaarde (1708). He was rewarded with a generous land grant in Woodstock, near Oxford, which became the site
of Blenheim Palace. At this time the duke was in Venice as an extraordinary ambassador. Handel's Utrecht Te Deum (HWV 238; 1713) was
composed to celebrate the treaty which ended Marlborough's Wars, after which (1714) the Hanoverian George I ascended the English throne.

4 Pallade veneta, p. 265.

300 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Dedicated to Christian Ludwig, Prince of Mecklenburg-Schwerin?'

Op,

Suleyman, the Shah of Algeria, banished his infants to the custody of his brother Mehmet, but en route
to their new home they were seized and killed by Turkish sailors. A different set of children was given
over to the care of the uninformed brother. Only after the proxy children were grown and contemplating
marriage was Suleyman made aware of the deception. Non son Quella was first performed on 29
November (A, M, NV) or | December 1710 (PV). The libretto was dedicated by Zan [Giovanni] Battista
Zuccato on the earlier date.

t According to Pallade veneta, the bizarre title was symptomatic ofa curious production. Anna Vicenza
Dobbi, an apparent member of the cast, filed a notarial complaint (stragiudizialey' on 19 January 1711.
In it she expressed dismay over not having received the first installment (of three) of the 2,000 /ire [de
grossi] 100 piccoli offered her for the season. The three installments were due on 25 December, the
midpoint of Carnival, and the first week of Lent. Carlo Arraini filed a complaint with a notary on the
same date stating that he had not yet received the first installment (of two) of the 1,000 lire de piccioli
offered him the preceding August to cover his travel expenses, maintenance, and honorarium. Falier
may have been the impresario.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 452; Groppo 456; Wiel 98; Alm 588

1710/11 Il tiranno eroe' Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[THE HEROIC TYRANT]
A dramma per musica Text by Vincenzo Cassani
im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1710-12-26
[ca Dedicated to Domenico Grillo, Nob. Gen.*!
CO0 Elected a consul and captain, the Roman senator Sulla soon found himself in a civil war with Marius.

The fictional account given here revolves on various mistaken assumptions concerning the identity
of Valeria, a young relative of Marius, and Sulla's daughter Emilia. // tiranno was first performed, with
full applause, on 26 (A) or 27 December 1710 (PV). The title-page was dated 1710. The work was
still running between 10 (NV) and 17 January 1711, when it provided universal satisfaction (M).
Giovanni Paita sang as Sulla, with Santa Stella as Emilia and Margarita Prosdocimo as Valeria. Another
production of // tiranno opened, probably with Albinoni's music, at the Cocomero, Florence, in late
December 1712.*? A setting by Antonio Bononcini was given in Milan in 1715.

5 Apparently this was Christian Ludwig (1683-1756), the son of Friedrich of Grabow and Christine Wilhelmine of Hesse- Homburg. He was
also a brother of Sophie Louise (1685-1735), the third wife (from 1708; she was nicknamed the Mecklenburg Venus) of Frederick, king
of Prussia. A contemporary Christian Ludwig (1677-1734) was the seventh child of Archduke Friedrich Wilhelm of Brandenburg (1620-88)
and his second wife, Dorothea of Holstein (1636-89).

6 The 29th is likely to be correct; the 30th was the first Sunday of Advent.
27 A stragiudiziale was a complaint filed with a notary rather than an attorney (hence it was outside [stra-] the legal system).

?81-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Giuseppe Bellan, Busta 1864, item of 19 Gennaio 1710 M.V. The document implies that both would also have
sung in Circe delusa (1711/5). Dobbi's contract was with Zorzi Falier (apparently the librettist). No cast list is given in the libretto.

* Also the librettist of 1711/4, he was not related to Antonio Falier, the dedicatee of Castoreo's favola II prencipe corsaro, for the academic
Teatro ai Saloni in 1658.

3 The Venetian dramatist Vincenzo Cassani (c. 1677-after 1732) collaborated almost exclusively with Albinoni on operas and with Benedetto
Marcello on dramatic cantatas.

3! Not only a Genovese nobleman, Grillo was also the duke of Giuliano and several other holdings.
 The 26th is confirmed as the date of opening of a new opera in GB-Lpro, SPV, Series 99, Box 58, f.298v.
3 R.L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 223.

A

 1710b
1711/1

i

OL

1711/2

i

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 301

Score in D-WD (1711); arias in B-Bc
Listed as Bonlini 454; Groppo 458; Wiel 96; Alm 590

La morte d'Adone. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

La costanza fortunata in amore' Music anonymousTM
[CONSTANCY FORTUNATE IN LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Maria Piccioli
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1711-01-10

Dedicated to the Venetian nobility

In this revised version of Ermelinda (Piazzola, 1681/4 and 1685/8) Aristaios, wishing to protect his
daughter from the ravages of love, decided to live in a rural village of Phoenicia. Hermelinde's lover,
the prince Ormond, in order to seek her out, disguised himself as a beggar and then, not wanting to
alarm her father, pretended to madness. The work's Arcadian scenes depicted the sites past which
Aristaios led Hermelinde: a grove of cedars, a solitary house in the countryside, and other rural settings.
This short work was first performed between 10 and 17 January 1711 (PV). The title-page of its libretto
is dated 1710 M.V. The impresario Antonio Bonomo, on 27 January 1711 M.V., acknowledged many
grievous problems. He admitted that debts were owed to singers and to the costume-maker Andrea
di Bona. The problems were caused, he claimed, by unforeseen expenses and aggravated by the
cancellation of some performances. The document was signed by singers and instrumentalists, who
committed themselves to performing in another work when it was ready.*

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 455; Groppo 459; Wiel 100; Alm 591

Il tradimento, traditor di se stesso Music attributed to Antonio Lotti
[TREACHERY, TRAITOR TO ITSELF]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and a divertimento giocoso SORTING DATE: 1711-01-17

Dedicated to Princess Isabella Cesi Ruspoli*

Cyrus, the second son of Darius, revolted against his older brother, Artaxerxes, and was killed by him
in battle. Artaxerxes' oldest son, also called Darius, when given adult responsibilities, fell in love with
his father's wife, Aspasia, and the doting parent renounced his own marriage to permit the union.
Ultimately, however, Artaxerxes' son Ocho (here called Ariarate) ascended to the throne.

II tradimento, a relatively short work for San Giovanni Grisostomo, was first performed on 17 January
1711 (M, A, PV), the date of dedication of its libretto. // tradimento was produced in Fano in February
1718 for the exiled English court, then resident in Urbino. A resetting by Francesco Mancini ran in
Naples (as Artaserse, re di Persia) in 1713.

* Nicola Giglio (who is otherwise unknown) is named in notarial papers (note 35) as both the composer and librettist, but it is more likely
that he adapted them to suit the circumstances.

35 |-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Antonio Ciola, Busta 4027, item of 27 Ianuaris 1710 M.V. Those signing were Maria Ghirardi Pili Zani on
behalf of her daughter Tonina, Stefano Scalfi on behalf of his daughter Zaneta [Giovanna], Pre. Matio Luchini, Anzola Passe [ = Angela Pasi;
also Pace], Carlo Mosi [Mossi] on behalf of his daughter Rosalia, and Marco Zartro [Sartore?]. The instrumentalists signing were Gaudenzio
di Mosto, Zaneto [= Giovanni] Reali, Marco della Bella, Pre. Battista Luna [first violin]; Francesco Zerago [second violin], Isepppo Stuer
[Stener?] [third violin], and Anzoletto della Tomba. No subsequent work was produced at San Fantin during this season.

% The wife (from 1695) of the count Francesco Maria Ruspoli, she was the daughter of the duke of Acquasparta and the niece (on her mother's
side) of the future pope Innocent XIII (1721-24). Antonio Caldara served as the count's maestro di cappella from 1709 to 1716 (recent discoveries
by Ursula Kirkendale in papers of the Ruspoli family concern musical activities in the three immediately preceding years).

> Corp, Stuart Court, p. 356.

302 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Ow Its most exquisite music was noted in Pallade veneta, which said the composer had surpassed
himself.** The mercurio of the 24th reported universal satisfaction, and NV of the same date (after
pointing out that the librettist was a Roman) said that the work garnered the most applause of all works
currently in production. Anton Francesco Carli sang as Artaxerses, with Francesco Vitali as the young,
Darius and Diamante Maria Scarabelli as Aspasia. As a Zoroastrian priestess, Aspasia merited a scene
featuring a temple of the Sun at the end of Act Two. The third act concluded with an equally lavish
scene, featuring a marine monster and tritons, in Darius's palace.

A Arias in D-WD
Listed as Bonlini 456; Groppo 460; Wiel 105; Alm 592

1711/3 Tamerlano Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini
[TAMERLANE]
A tragedia per musica Text attributed to Agostino Piovene
V1 Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1711-01-24
& Without dedicatee
oo Designed not as a history...but as a tragedy, according to Piovene, Jamerlano opened in Prusa, the

capital of Bithynia, the first city conquered by Tamerlane after the defeat of the Turks. His command
over tribal forces enabled him to defeat Bayezid/Bajazet. This third work of the season opened on
24 January 1711 (NV). The title-page of the libretto is dated 1710. Much applause was anticipated
because the librettist (autore) had contributed his fee for the work to improve the scenery. Tamerlano
brought delight both for its poetry and for the exquisiteness of its music. It and the preceding work
were by other accounts (A, M) received with universal satisfaction. Giovanni Paita sang as Bayezid,
with Gio. Battista Carboni (Zamerlano) and Santa Stella (Asteria).

- The treatment of the same subject by M. A. Ziani (1688/10) had established a worthy precedent. This
new libretto, given in this setting at Treviso in the autumn, was to be set many times subsequently.
Gasparini's setting was given at the Cocomero (Florence) at the end of 1716 and in Reggio Emilia in
1719. Pariati's text was the basis of Haym's adaptation by Handel in 1724 (HWV 18, 1724). A pastiche
(RV 703) arranged by Vivaldi with music by Hasse, Giacomelli, Porpora, and Riccardo Broschi was
given in Verona in 1735. Bernasconi set a revised version for the first of Galli-Bibiena's productions
at San Giovanni Grisostomo (1742/6).

A Scores in A-Wn (Reggio Emilia, 1719 ); D-WD (1711); arias in D-B, WD
Listed as Bonlini 457; Groppo 461; Wiel 95; Alm 593

1711/4 Le gare di politica e d'amore Music attributed to Giovanni Maria Ruggieri
[THE COMPETITION OF POLITICS AND LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Salvi*

M1 Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1711-02-04

38 Pallade veneta, p. 267.

* I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 161, f. 65.
 |-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 161, f. 65v.
*' Pallade veneta, pp. 267f.

 The Garland facsimile of Gasparini's Bajazet (cf. 1723/4) shows A-Wn, MS 9, to be associated with a 1719 performance at the spring fair
in Reggio Emilia (hence its alternative name).

* Besides being a physician at the Florentine court, Salvi (1664-1724) was the preferred librettist of Prince Ferdinand de' Medici.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 303

& Dedicated to Francesco Serra

OOo When Berenice was proclaimed the queen of Egypt, Mithridates was the king of Pontos and Sulla ruled
Rome. Each male ruler feared that the beautiful Berenice, who was noted in particular for her hair, might
marry a pawn of the other. Fortunately for both, she married Alexander, through whom both sides were
united. The action takes place in Alexandria. Le gare is reported to have opened both by 31 January
(M, A) and during recent days preceding 7 February 1711 (PV). Its libretto was dedicated on 28
January. Pallade veneta, moralizing about the text's message that prudence conquers every passion,
termed the drama delicious.* The librettist apologized for the constrained space afforded by San
Samuele. Perti's setting of the text had been staged at Pratolino in September 1709.%

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 458; Groppo 462; Wiel 109; Alm 594

1711/5 Circe delusa Music attributed to Giuseppe Boniventi
[CIRCE DELUDED]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giorgio Antonio Falier
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1711-02-05
& Dedicated to Richard (Lord Viscount) Lonsdale**

These episodes from the encounter of Circe and Ulysses emphasized the sorceress's ability to change
one form of life into another. She changed Picus, the king of the Latins, into a wild boar. When he rejected
her love, she changed him into a woodpecker. The shipwrecked, demented Ulysses believed her to be
Penelope, his wife. The work began and ended with Circe's soliloquies. At the start she invoked the
horrible spirits, while at the end, as she watched Ulysses depart, she longed for death.

O@ Although some sources (M, A) suggest that Circe opened shortly before 31 January 1711,' its first
performance took place on 5 February 1711, when the work was found to be agreeable. A license
to print its libretto had been issued on 13 January. Perhaps to please his English patron, the librettist
interleaved numerous Latin quotations from ancient sources into his account of the life of Circe.

BE The manner of staging was Arcadian, with its woods and fountains, gardens and herbs. Yet the
transformations brought about by Circe's magic must have made a greater impression on audiences
than the underlying idyll. In Act One Ulysses' men were turned into monsters and then restored to their
human appearance. In Act Two Circe was changed into a peasant and then converted back to herself.
In Act Three Scylla was changed into a monster (according to the legend, with twelve feet and six heads).
Each scene was introduced by the trembling of a mountain. The cooperation of the cast apparently
faltered, for on 8 February the Council of Ten ordered Giovanni Castellini to perform and demanded
his court appearance the following Wednesday (11 February).

A marquis of Genoa.

5 The claim made in the libretto, that the text had been performed during the preceding year for a great prince of Italy, suggests that no
connection was seen to Pierre Corneille's Tite et Berenice (1670). The only arguably related works listed subsequently are the resetting of
Pasqualigo's text by Orlandini (1725/1) and of Vitturi's by Galuppi (1741/1; also reset for Sant' Angelo in 1759), both held by some to have
been influenced by Racine's Berenice.

6 Pallade veneta, p. 268.
47R. L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 215.

48 Baron of Lowther. J. J. Heidegger, manager of the Haymarket Theater, London, dedicated Silvani's libretto for Ernelinda (see 1711/1) to
Lonsdale in 1713. Circe was the subject of one of the earliest operas given in England. The work (1677) was by Davenant and Bannister.

5! In NGDMM/2 Harris Saunders reports an opening, probably based on (M), on 29 January.
* Pallade veneta, p. 268.

53 1-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 40, Fasc. 1710 [sic], item of 8 Febraro 1710 [= 1711]. (Records of the Consiglio dei Dieci are recorded old-style.)
Giovanni Castellini is an unknown name in Venetian theater rosters of the time. Teresa Castellini (La Milanese) was a singer of the following
generation.

304 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 459; Groppo 463; Wiel 108; Alm 595

 17lla Ifigenia in Tauride. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

1711b Psiche. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

 171llc Il nascimento d' Aurora. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

1711d Il merito, la scienza, e la gloria. Cf. Suppl. 7.

1711/6 Armida in Damasco Music by Giacomo RampiniTM
[ARMIDE IN DAMASCUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Grazio Braccioli*
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1711-10-17

& Dedicated to Silvio Antonio Marsigli Rossi

In the First Crusade (eleventh century), according to Tasso's epic Gerusalemme liberata (1579), the
Saracen sorceress Armide was lured to the Holy Land to deceive the Christian crusaders. Among her
intended victims was their leader Tancred. Rinaldo, who succeeded in liberating his imprisoned allies,
fell under Armide's spell but persuaded the sorceress to convert to Christianity. A Ferrarese member
of the Arcadian colony of Rome, Braccioli sought here to balance prescribed reforms with the vivacity
of earlier literary traditions.** This was his first libretto for the Venetian stage.

 The libretto was dedicated on 17 October 1711, the date of the first performance. The attendance was
expected to be good because few people had gone away for villeggiatura. The work was said still
to be running on 14 November (M), although one ballerina who appeared in the work was paid for only
two performances. The relatively early opening date and the dedicatee's presence may have been related
to the investiture of the new papal legate [Girolamo Mattei].

Ow The principal roles were taken by Margherita Gualandi (La Campioli; here Armida) and Giuseppe
Dini (Rinaldo), with Francesco Maria Venturini cast both as Hydraot/Idraote, the king of Damascus,
and as Pluto. The scenery was painted by Bernardo Canal, in what appears to have been his first theatrical
commission. Among the more interesting scenes were Pluto's inferno (end of Act One) and a garden
with four statues representing the four seasons (end of Act Two).

 The Council of Ten, on 29 February 1712, ruled in favor of Nicola Pini (Rosmondo) and other singers,
who had appealed for assistance in collecting overdue pay. The complaint cited contracts made with
the impresario Cristofolo [Cristoforo] Fuggieri [Frigeri?] on 17 June 1711 for the whole of the new

* Rampini (1680-1760) was then maestro di cappella at the cathedral of Padua.
55 Braccioli (1682-1752) was a Ferrarese lawyer whose career as a librettist was largely confined to Venice and to the years 1711-15.

56 One ballerina engaged for the autumn season at Sant' Angelo was Cristina Medorini, whose father signed on her behalf (7 October 1711)
a contract which provided for a payment of 50 soldi [2.5 Venetian lire] per night. When a new contract was negotiated on 28 November, the
rate of pay was reduced to 2 /ire a night, but perhaps only for Cristina's younger sister. Cf. Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, p. 37.

5' The dedicatee was froma leading family of Bologna. Family members were distinguished in letters, geography, classical studies, and military
science. The best known, Luigi Ferdinando Marsigli Rossi (1658-1730), was a cartographer and strategic advisor to Charles VI.
58 Cf. Hill, Orlando, passim.

5 I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 161, f. 614v. The duke of Guastalla had just left Venice to go to Milan, where he was to meet with the duke of Modena
and Prince Ercolani, all of whom were to meet the king of Spain. The duke of Guastalla and Prince Ercolani had returned to Venice by 24
November (CO).

 See the commentary under the third work of the season, La costanza (1711/10). It is noteworthy that Orgiani's Armida regina di Damasco
(on a text by Girolamo Colatelli) seems to have been running concurrently in Verona.

' This scene seems to have been recycled at Sant' Angelo in 1746 in Bertoni's Armida (1746/13), but it may also have inspired Vivaldi's celebrated
concerto cycle The Four Seasons, Op. 8, Nos. 1-4 (1725). Vivaldi's preface said that the works had long been in use.

1711/7

i

ra
QOe

1711/8

V1

&
QOe

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 305

accounting year 1711-12. Fuggieri had ceded his position and the monies he was holding to Gio. Battista
Zucatto on 6 October 1711. Friction between managers and performers grew increasingly shrill over
the next few years, as later entries for Sant' Angelo indicate.

Earlier vocal works on related subjects figured in Ferrari's work for SS. Giovanni e Paolo (1639), as
well as Lully's setting (1686) of Quinault's text. Later accounts of the story of Armide in the opera
repertory were legion. Those of Gluck (Paris, 1777), Rossini (Naples, 1817), and Dvofak (Prague, 1903)
still enjoy some currency.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 462; Groppo 466; Wiel 106; Alm 598, 599

Costantino Music by Francesco Gasparini
[CONSTANTINE]

A dramma per musica (5) Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1711-11-11

Dedicated to Francis, Prince of Lorraine

The story, derived from Corneille's Maximien, concerns the relations between the imperial general
(later Roman emperor) Licinius and the Eastern emperor Constantine.TM Licinius consolidated his own
position by defeating Maximianus/Massimiano, Constantine's father-in-law, and marrying Constantine's
sister Flavia. Costantino was first performed on 11 November 1711 (M, NV).* Stefano Romani (II
Pignattino) sang in the title role. The role of his wife (Fausta) was taken by a French singer, Marie
de Chateauneuf. Francesco Maria Cignoni, from the Tuscan court, took the part of Maximianus, with
Pietro Casati as Licinius. The text was recycled in Orlandini's Massimiano (see 1731/2).

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 461; Groppo 465; Wiel 102; Alm 597

La forza del sangue Music attributed to Antonio Lotti
[THE POWER OF BLOOD]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1711-11-14

Dedicated to Almore Pisani and Isabella Cornara

After the death of his father Leo, the young Byzantine prince Constantine was consigned for his survival
by his mother, Zoe, to the care of Romanus [archbishop of Ravenna, 878-c. 888] under the assumed
name Heraclius. This plan was designed to foil Zoe's enemy, the general Phocas/Foca, who believed
Heraclius to be his own son. The plot appears to be a sequel to // comando non inteso et ubbidito,

 ]-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 41, Fasc. 1711 [sic], item of 29 Febraro 1711 [M.V.].
 He may have been in Venice when the work opened but he had departed for Vienna by 14 November (see I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 161, f. 698v).

* Constantine's adoption of Christianity in the fourth century significantly altered relations between the Eastern and Western Empires.
5 Harris Saunders gives 8 November in NGDMM/2.

 This was the first new production at San Cassiano since the death of Francesco Maria de' Medici on 3 February 1711. The Florentine theaters
were closed for the balance of the year, but the usual Florentine singers may not have been at liberty to take part in this production. Mourning
for the duchess Suzanne Henriette of Mantua, the widow of Ferdinando Carlo, who had died in Paris in December 1710, was still in progress.

 But see the commentary on La Zoe (1736/4).

* Almoro Pisani was a procurator and an ambitious politician. Isabella Cornara was about to become his wife. Both were from leading noble

families.

306

1711/9

i

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

which had been given the previous year. This unusually long work was first performed on 14 November
1711 (M, NV), the date of its dedication. Francesco de Grandis sang in the role of Heraclius (Eraclio),
with Santa Stella (Zoe) and Anton Francesco Carli (Foca). The opening scene, depicting the imperial
palace at Constantinople, was one of extraordinary splendor. La forza was reset by Buini for performance
in Florence (1726) and Bologna (1728).

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 460; Groppo 464; Wiel 104; Alm 596

Elisa Music attributed to Giovanni Maria Ruggieri
[ELisa]

A commedia [in musica] Text by Domenico Lalli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1711-11-25

Dedicated to Nicole Berlendi

In the text of this comedy, Elisa had been promised in marriage to Ricciardo, the son of the elderly
Florentine merchant Fabrizio. After the untimely death of her father, she was sold to a merchant in
Constantinople, where she remained for seven years. Upon her escape and return to Florence, she
discovers that Ricciardo has found another love. Disguised as Fabio, she takes a job in his father's shop.
Eventually her full identity is discovered and the marriage finally takes place. Elisa was said by Bonlini
and Groppo to have been the first comic opera given in Venice.' A few earlier works (e.g., Silvani's
Il miglior d'ogni amore per il peggiore d'ogni odio, 1703/8) had significant comic content, although
their libretti did not declare them to be comedies. Here one might cite the intrusion of a Neapolitan
librettist which shifted the emphasis, although in earlier instances the connections were often Florentine.
Lalli's preface to Elisa assumed an Arcadian posture in noting that comedy was an instrument of ancient
Athenian rule. He cited models from Greek and Roman drama as well as many from recent centuries
(by Trissino, Guarini, Ariosto et al.) based on them.

A license to print the libretto was issued on 25 November 1711. Elisa had a total of nine performances,
the final one not later than 28 December. (Ortolani deduces from this that the work was not well
received.)

Despite lofty discussion of literary prototypes, the roles showed pronounced influence from the commedia
dell'arte. A pedant, two servants, and a captain complement those noted above. As in comedy, the
performers were not identified. Two other distinguishing elements of this plot were its modern context
and its clear refutation of the typical progression of events in an opera seria, for here love is fickle rather
than unwavering. Although Sant' Angelo had been discouraged by the Grimani from competing for
the use of comedy troupes (Song and Season, Ch. 8.1), with Vincenzo Grimani dead and with San
Samuele now producing operas, the time for genre experimentation had come.

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 463; Groppo 467; Wiel 107; Alm 600

 A tragedy on the subject of Phocas had been given at the Collegio de' Nobili in Padua in 1680 (see Sartori 21151, a scenario ed argomento
del Foca). Silvani's La forza del sangue was in no way related to Gigli's, which treated Frankish history of the same period.

 Also Berlendis. The Berlendi(s), who were from Bergamo, were raised to nobility in 1662 in recognition of their artillery service during

the war in Candia.

 Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 164; Groppo, Catalogo, p. 101.

 See the commentary under La costanza in cimento (1711/10).

% Ortolani, Tutte le opere [subsequently TO], x, 1256.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 307

1711/10 Lacostanza in cimento con la crudelta Music by Floriano ArrestiTM
[CONSTANCY TESTED BY CRUELTY]
A dramma per musica Text by Grazio Braccioli
MM Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli for La Virti, Pale SORTING DATE: 1711-12-29
& Dedicated to Josef Luther, Count of Konigsegg
 Arbakes, the king of Hieropolis, was succeeded by Dardanus. The wicked tyrant Alphones imprisoned

Irene, the daughter of Dardanus and the widow of Arbakes, together with her infant son. This led to
a series of intrigues, principally amorous ones. Although the Mercurio suggests that La costanza
was first performed between 9 and 16 January 1712, notarial documents indicate that it had 16 or 17
performances beginning on 29 December. The libretto had been dedicated on 26 December 1711;
the title-page was dated 1712. Four members of the cast, including Margherita Gualandi (rene), were
from Bologna, with the remainder coming from Florence (e.g., Francesco Maria Venturini), Modena,
and Mantua (e.g., Nicola Tricarico).
A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 464; Groppo 468; Wiel 116; Alm 601

1712/1 Merope' Music by Francesco Gasparini
[MEROPE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
i Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1712-01-09
ca Dedicated to Theodor Constantin Lubomirski*

Merope (Maria Landini*') was the widow of Cresphontes, the late king of Messenia, which was now
threatened by the tyrant Polyphontes (G. B. Carboni). A lengthy introduction to the libretto philosophized
about the nature of tragedy. The plot was inspired by Guarini's // pastor fido.

Ow Merope was first performed between 9 and 16 January 1712 (M).* The title-page was dated 1711. A
Florentine production opened late in February 1713. The text enjoyed phenomenal popularity all over
Europe throughout the century. Later settings for Venice included those by Giacomelli (San Giovanni
Grisostomo, 1734/5), Vivaldi (as L oracolo in Messenia, Sant' Angelo, 1737/10), Jommelli (San Giovanni
Grisostomo, 1741/6), Perez (the same theater, 1750/8), Gassmann (San Moise, 1757), Latilla (San

4 Arresti (1667-1717) was organist at San Petronio, Bologna, from 1703 and prince of the Accademia Filarmonica in 1715.

* It appears that these intermezzi involved a soloist, Laura Soranzo, and a group of dancers. She represented Virtue in a celestial scene at the
end of Act One, and Pale, with satyrs, at the end of Act Two. Her only other appearance in Venice had been in Armida in Damasco.

76 A descendant of the house of Rothenfels (Allgau), he held a minor appointment in the Holy Roman Empire.
7' In Greek mythology Hieropolis was the city of the centaurs. Dardanus was the son of Zeus and Electra.

78 1-Vas, CX, Busta 41, ff. 12v-13, contains a request by Medoro Medorini for payment to his second daughter Hominara Beatrice, a ballerina
[his first daughter, Cristina, was already engaged at the theater]. Although the work is not mentioned by name, La costanza had balli, while
the preceding work, Elisa, did not. Only on 15 April did Medorini receive the sum of 16 ducats, to be shared by his two daughters. The
performances were given on 29-31 December; 5-7, 10, 14, 17-18, 22, 24-25, 28, and 30-31 January. Medorini's complaint suggests that the
work continued into February, but in fact it was changed; see Arsinoe (1712/3).

 With contributions by Pariati, according to early bibliographers. Alm credits Zeno only. A similar story had been related in Eteocle e Polinice
(1674/4). In 1714 a license to print Scipione Maffei's tragedia called La Merope was issued (Suppl. 3a). Zeno's correspondence (Lettere,
I, 349, entry of 22 Gennaio 1713 M.V.) indicates that the stage drama opened in the middle of January 1714.

 A Polish prince of the Holy Roman Empire. His father had had a lively time in Venice in the early 1680s, but the thrones of Saxony and
Poland had now been united for more than a decade.

5! Originally called Marie de Chateauneuf.

 The dedicatee was already present in Venice by the 2nd but without a following.

308

1712/2

i

1712/3

MM
AO

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Benedetto, 1763), and Nasolini (San Benedetto, 1796). A spoken version was staged at San Salvatore
in 1714 (cf. Suppl. 3a).

Arias in I-Tf

Listed as Bonlini 465; Groppo 469; Wiel 103; Alm 602

Publio Cornelio Scipione' Music attributed to Carlo Fr. Pollarolo
[PUBLIUS CORNELIUS SCIPIUS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Agostino Piovene
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1712-01-09

Dedicated to the Venetian nobility

After defeating Antiochos, the king of Syria, Publius Cornelius Scipio took his enemy's son hostage,
thus providing the historical foundation of this work. Francesco Vitali took the lead role, with Santa
Stella (Anagilda) and Diamante Scarabelli (Erifile).

This must be the other work which, with Merope, opened between 9 and 16 January 1712 (M).TM
Pollarolo's work was produced with a different cast and the intermezzi Dorilla e Brenno in the salon
of the Signori Capranica in Rome during the Carnival of 1713. Handel treated the subject in a like-named
work (HWV 20; 1726). Rolli's model was ostensibly based on Salvi's text (set anonymously in 1704
for the Teatro di San Sebastiano in Leghorn). The libretto for it followed the Venetian exemplar in noting
that Handel had created a work of maximum expression and harmony within the space of three weeks.
Scipione il giovane (1731/12) also had minor debts to this work.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 466; Groppo 470; Wiel 113; Alm 603

Arsinoe vendicata Music by Giovanni Maria Ruggieri
[ARSINOE VINDICATED]

A dramma per musica Text by Grazio Braccioli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a combattimento SORTING DATE: 1712-02-02

Dedicated to Giovanni Battista Labia

Ptolemy (Nicola Tricarico) deluded his sister Arsinoe (Margherita Gualandi; La Campioli), the widow
of the first king of Macedonia, causing her to kill two of her own sons. Her effort was aided by the
military leader Belgius (Francesco Maria Venturini). Arsinoe opened on 2 February; its final performance
was on the 8th. Its libretto had been dedicated on the 1st.

A dispute between the cast and the impresario, Gio. Battista Zucatto, about overdue pay came to ahead
when Lent began (17 February). On the 11th, an agent of the Council of Ten recorded a week's worth
of receipts which he had personally monitored. He was charged with seeing that the singers did not
confiscate the costumes! Gualandi claimed that her costume was her personal property.** The numbers
of tickets sold for each night were recorded as 147 (February 2nd), 109 (3rd), 115 (4th), 87 (5th), 82

 Collection of Count Brusasco.

* Lord Peterborough arrived in Venice during the week ending 16 January (CO) and is likely to have seen a performance. Another important
visitor was the prince of Baden-Durlach.

55 Only the title-page belongs to the 1712 production. The cast-list and libretto, in which Predieri is cited as the composer, are from the 1731
production of Scipione il giovane.

* A Venetian nobleman.

* The opening date is documented in the legal proceedings discussed below. Sartori 2905 also gives 2 February. The year was occasionally
considered to be old-style, but, if so, there would have been a conflict with Le passioni.

88 T-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza, Fasc. 1711, item of 11 Febraro 1711 [M.V.].

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 309

(6th), 88 (7th), and 46 (8th). The monitored receipts totaled 1903 lire, 2 soldi, against expenses of 1903
lire, 15 soldi. Only a few folding chairs (scagni) were rented each night.

ww The payment records list various elements of the staging which are not indicated in the libretto. Among
these were a combattimento performed by an independent battle troupe, a corps of trumpet and
tamburini players (probably to accompany the combat), a dancer (balarin), and two masks (possibly
to provide an intermezzo, although none is associated with this work). The orchestra members (sonadori)
were collectively paid  [/ire] 53:18 for each night except the last, when they received only 39:9.
Partial payments to singers began to materialize after a further complaint to the Council of Ten on 30
June 1712.!

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 467; Groppo 471; Wiel 117; Alm 604

1712a Apollo in Tempe. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
1712b Ecuba. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1712/4 Le gare generose Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[THE GENEROUS CONTEST]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Zaniboni
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1712-11-05
& Dedicated to Nicol Pisani, Nob. Ven.
& Derived from the text of Thomas Corneille, Le gare recounts how Segestes promised his daughter,

Ismenia,TM in marriage to Arminius in exchange for the betrothal of Arminius's sister, Polyxena, to
Segestes' son, Sigismund. Political developments eventually made this plan difficult to implement.
Le gare was first performed on 5 November 1712 (M). (A license to print the libretto had been issued
without date for aut. 1712.) Nicola Grimaldi, who sang in the title role, had arrived from London
by 14 October.* Neither the text nor the music received common applause, even though the company
was regarded as one of the best.* Stefano Romani was cast as Sigismund, with Gio. Battista Carboni
as Segestes. The female cast members (Vienna Mellini and Maria Eleonora de Scio) were little known.
A Arias in D-SWI
Listed as Bonlini 468; Groppo 472; Wiel 114; Alm 605

 Loc. cit. The numbers were 0, 0, 5, 1, 8, 15, and 0.

 This could have been either because the number of players was reduced or because the number of items played was reduced. It was not unusual
at the end of Carnival for only the first act of the work to be given. The two leading violinists (possibly Gio. Battista and Antonio Vivaldi)
were distinguished in a separate complaint of the same day, but their names are not given.

*' |-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 41, Fasc. 1712, items of 30 Maggio, due giugno, 17 giugno, 30 Giugno, and 27 Agosto. Margherita Gualandi,
having received 56 ducats on 15 March, now received a further 25. Other payments included 118 to Francesco Venturini (paid in absentia
on 22 March; he now received a further 10), and 91 to Nicola Pini (paid on 21 April). A composite entry of 304 covered payments to the
remaining singers ([Angelo] Cantelli, [Gioconda] Landi, [Giuseppe] Dini, [Nicola] Tricarico, and once again Venturini), and other miscellany.
On the 17th they had individually received the following sums: Cantelli 34, Venturini 40, Landi 27, Pini 30, and Tricarico 20. Someone
identified only as Carletto (possibly the balarin) received 23; Gaetano and his company (which could have provided either the enactment
of the combat or the music for it) received 134. These disbursements totaled 210. In August, Venturini was ordered to return his costume.

 A Bolognese count. Paisiello's work on the same title (Naples, 1786) was based on a text by Giuseppe Palomba.
3 Thomas Corneille was one of the editors of Le Mercure galant.
* In historical accounts, the daughter of Segestes was Thusnelda.

5 GB-Lpro, SPV, Series 99, Box 59, f. 523v, 525. Grimaldi had taken the title role in Handel's first London opera, Rinaldo (HWV 7a, which
had opened on 24 February 1711. He was lampooned in Joseph Addison's criticism in Spectator of 6 March for having been exposed to a
Tempest in Robes of Ermin, and sailing in an open Boat upon a Sea of Paste-Board (Deutsch, Handel, p. 35).

 |-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 162, f. 557.

310 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1712/5 L'infedelta punita Music attributed to C. F. Pollarolo, Antonio Lotti
[INFIDELITY PUNISHED]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1712-11-15
& Dedicated to Pietro Zanardi'
Oo@ In a contest for the Gothic throne, Luitmere bested Vittigis. Having only one daughter, Gundeberg,

Luitmere was unable to secure the succession for his line. Thus Vittigis's only son, Ricimer, laid claim
to it upon his father's death and imprisoned Gundeberg's fiance, Indimer, the king of Norway. The
work was situated in Uppsala. L 'infedelta was first performed, with reported levels of approval ranging
from satisfaction (NV) to much applause (M), on 15 November 1712. A license to print the libretto
had been issued on 3 October 1712, while the libretto was dedicated on 12 November. The cast included
Margherita Durastante (Gundeberga) and Bartolomeo Bortoli (Ricimero). The ballo of Act Two featured
court buffoons.
A Arias in D-Dlb
Listed as Bonlini 469; Groppo 473; Wiel 110; Alm 606

1712/6 La gloria trionfante d'amore Music by Giacomo Rampini
[GLORY TRIUMPHANT OVER LOVE]
A dramma per musica Text by Grazio Braccioli
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With Salpina e Barillotto; balli SORTING DATE: 1712-11-22
& Dedicated to Aurora Sanseverino
o@ Ostensibly based on the life of Dido and the founding of Carthage as described in Virgil's Aeneid, this

tale by Braccioli featured Juno and Venus and the benevolent genius of Iarbas, who, like Aeneas,
was in love with Dido. The action took place in Carthage, which was, according to legend, built on
land donated by Iarbas. The librettist justified his changes to the story as satisfying the theater's need
for variety. The libretto was dedicated on 16 November. The opening was announced for 22 November
1712 (M).' This production was the first given during Antonio Vivaldi's tenure as impresario at
Sant' Angelo. Vivaldi may have been assisted by his father, Giovanni Battista.'' The cast, of little renown,
included Elena Croce Viviani (Didone), Angelica Rapparini (Giunone), Orsola Astori Sticotti (Venere),
and Giuseppe Ignazio Ferrari (Jarba).

&S An incision in the libretto showing Antonio Mauro's design for the Elysian fields (Act Two) is one
of the earliest surviving testimonies to scenography at Sant' Angelo. A description of this scene in the
libretto relates that on a cart pulled by Immortal Virtue, the Throne of Glory appeared on a golden seat
(carried by a phoenix) with Fate atop a starry globe (carried by an eagle) alongside. The work otherwise

 Here said to be a count of the Polesine. In the dedication, the librettist noted Zanardi's residence in Germania and his service to the imperial
court. It also mentioned the advantageous marriages he had arranged for his long series of sons, daughters, nieces, and nephews. The dowries
provided by Zanardi are also noted. The same name belonged to a new nobleman (1653-after 1734) who was a merchant living near the
Do Mori. A Mantuan count who may have been related (Antonio Maria Zanardi Landi) was the eventual husband of Vivaldi's prima donna
Anna Tesieri detta La Giro.

* Rampini was a maestro di cappella in Padua.

 This noblewoman (1667-1728) was the daughter of Don Carlo Maria, prince of Bisignano and, from 1677 until his death in 1704, Prince
of Naples and a Spanish grandee. She was married to the duke of Laurenzana, Don Nicole Gaetani. Aurora Sanseverino was a well respected
Arcadian.

1 A report in NV for 28 Novembre 1712 identifies the work as La fedelta trionfante in amore.

'' |-Vas, Giudice de' Forestieri, Busta 78, petition of 6 June 1712 signed by Giovanni Battista et figlio Antonio Vivaldi conduttor del teatro
di Sant' Angelo. Vivaldi's tenure as an impresario at Sant' Angelo is held in many sources to have paralleled his long tenure as a composer
and maestro de' concerti, but according to Vio (private communications buttressed by extensive archival documentation), from 1715 onward
others were regularly cited as the impresari of the theater.

1712/7

i

&
ia)

1712/8

o

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 311

abounded in subterranean scenes featuring grottoes, ghosts, and departed souls. This was Mauro's first
explicit commission for Sant' Angelo, but unidentified Mauri and Mauri sons were earlier scenograph-
ers at SS. Giovanni e Paolo (from 1694) and at San Cassiano (from 1707).'

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 470; Groppo 474; Wiel 115; Alm 607

Spurio Postumio Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[SPURIUS POSTHUMIUS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Agostino Piovene
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1712-12-26

Without dedicatee'

In the late second century BC the Roman consul Spurius Posthumius suffered military reversals after
leaving his troops in the care of his brother Aulus. He was eventually convicted by a tribunal, represented
in this work by disembodied Voices of the Tribunes and of the People. The account is derived from
Livy. Spurio Postumio was first performed on 26 December 1712 with universal satisfaction (M).
The title role, although male and without motive for disguise, was taken by Margherita Durastante,
with Diamante Scarabelli as his fiancee Placilla. One ballo was for Roman hostages.

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 471; Groppo 475; Wiel 111; Alm 608, 609

I veri amici' Music attributed to Andrea Paulati'TM
[THE TRUE FRIENDS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani, rev. Domenico Lalli
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1712-12-26

Dedicated to Marchioness Daria Marsigli'

After murdering the pharoah Apries, Amasis tyrannized the Egyptian people. His effort to have Apries's
infant son, Evergetes, killed failed because the widowed Queen Candace concealed three male infants
 her son (Evergetes), Amasis's son (Lagides), and the son (Auletes) of a deceased friend. The body
of Auletes (believed to be that of Evergetes) was carried to Amasis by the minister Tilames, who was
the true friend of Candace.' The action was set in Memphis (later called Cairo).

I veri amici opened on 26 December 1712 and was received with universal satisfaction (M). Vienna
Mellini took the role of Candace, with Gio. Battista Carboni (Amasi) and Francesco Maria Cignoni
(Tilame). It is likely that all the theaters were closed from | through 17 January, for in addition to the
usual three-day closing at the new year a two-week indulgence (to pray for relief from a cattle plague
throughout the Veneto) was authorized by Patriarch Barbarigo on the 4th (CO).

The work had numerous further productions, including one at the Cocomero (Florence) opening on
27 December 1714. The text was reset by Albinoni for performance in Munich in 1722, and it was his
version which was given in Venice as 1723/2. Lalli revised the text as Candace (Lampugnani, 1740/6)
and it was reset as Evergete (Gibelli, 1748/8).

' Unpublished research made available by Gastone Vio reveals that in 1712 Antonio Mauri was given three boxes in the theater; a fourth
was added in 1713. Antonio Mauro was married to Vivaldi's sister, Cecilia.

83 Anticipated dedicatees may have been the marquis of Susa or the prince and princess of Anspach. All arrived in Venice in December 1712.

' Groppo and Wiel attribute both the 1712 and the 1723 versions of the work to Andrea Paulati.

'5 Tt was in 1712 that L. F. Marsigli (1658-1730), with the consent of Pope Clement XI, donated his vast collection of rare specimens from
Central Europe to the Bolognese Senate. It formed the basis of the city's Academy of Sciences.

'6 The work was based on Corneille's Heraclius (1646), but the names of the characters were changed.

312

1713/1

8

@f

1713/2

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 474; Groppo 478; Wiel 121; Alm 612

Le passioni per troppo amore Music by Johann David Heinichen'
[A PASSION FOR TOO MUCH LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Lisetta e Asdrobalo'TM SORTING DATE: 1713-01-28
Without dedicatee

This story of uxorial love so great that it became tyrannical was not derived, according to Noris, from
any pre-existing source, although it was held to be partly historical. The loving spouse was Gelinda;
the beloved husband was Helvitius/Elvezio, here styled king of the Indies.

Le passioni was apparently the work first performed on 28 January 1713 (M). Given the haste with
which it was succeeded by Calfurnia, Le passioni cannot have been well received. The surviving score
cannot easily shed light on the details of the work because, like much of the rest of Heinichen's music
preserved in Dresden, the manuscript is badly deteriorated. One early number in Act I (the bellicose
Sonate, amigeri) is sufficiently visible to establish that rich instrumentation was employed. The string
ensemble is here supplemented by two oboes, with trumpets and timpani added in selected passages.
The performance may have included allegorical roles not indicated in the libretto. A stage direction
in the final scene of Act Two cites Constancy and Fidelity, who are absent from the cast list but could
have appeared on a machine. Fetis, who inferred that Calfurnia (1713/3) was given before Le passioni,
reports that the impresario [Vivaldi] wanted to cancel the production after its second performance but
that the public demanded its continuation. Being dissatisfied, Vivaldi withheld the 200 ducats he
had promised Heinichen for the two works (1713/1, 1713/3). The composer went to Rome while litigation
was pursued in Venice, but he later returned to collect the money due him.'

Score in D-Dlb (aut.)
Listed as Bonlini 473; Groppo 477; Wiel 123; Alm 611

Porsena' Music attributed to Antonio Lotti
[PORSENNA]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Agostino Piovene
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1713-02-04
Without dedicatee

Porsenna, a legendary Tuscan king who ruled at the dawn of the Roman Republic, was camping on
the Janiculum in preparation for combat against the Roman consul Valerius as this work opened. In
the fictionalized overlay, his fiancee, the Alban princess Camilla, was imprisoned by the Romans as
she was being conducted to her wedding. Porsena was first performed on 4 February 1713 (M)." It
was greeted with universal applause (M). The production included Giovanni Paita (Porsena), Gaetano
Mossi (Valerio), and Giovanna Albertini (La Reggiana) as Camilla. According to the libretto, lighted
coals were seen in the temple of Apollo depicted in the third act.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 475; Groppo 479; Wiel 112; Alm 613, 614

'' The young Saxon lawyer and composer (1683-1729), already an accomplished music theorist, came to Venice in the entourage of the visiting
Saxon prince, who was intermittently resident in 1712-13. He toured other parts of Italy during lulls in Venetian social life.

' Cited in Groppo MS, p. 477.
' Fetis, Biografie universelle, IV, 279.
" The title-pages of US-LAu 613 and 614 are dated Il Carnovale dell'Anno 1712 and Nel Carnovale dell' Anno 1713 respectively.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 313

1713/3 Calfurnia Music by Johann David Heinichen
[CALPHURNIAS]
A dramma per musica Text by Grazio Braccioli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Lisetta e Batto SORTING DATE: 1713-02-07~
sy Dedicated to Count Pietro Zanardi
ov Calphurnias, the daughter of the consul Marius and his wife Julia, was engaged to Trebonius, who in

turn was the object of the affections of Alvida, the daughter of Jugurtha." The action took place both
within the city and outside the walls of Rome. In contrast to libretti ofan earlier era, Braccioli promised
not to bore the reader with an account of the many adventures in his plot but appealed instead, in an
opening paragraph in Latin, to the authority of Plutarch's account of Calphurnias. Heinichen's work
was produced in Hamburg in 1716 as Calpurnia, oder Die remische Grossmut. Braccioli's libretto was
revised by Nicholas Haym for Giovanni Bononcini's setting (London: King's Theatre, 1724).

@ Calfurnia, the libretto for which was dedicated on 26 January 1713, was first performed between 4
and 11 February 1713 (M). The opening probably took place before the 7th, when the impresari Gabriel
Faglia and Giovanni [Zuane] Orsato gave depositions concerning their inability to start the opening
performance until 3.30 [O.V.], owing to the fact that the instrumentalists did not appear until 3.''? The
year, reported by Wiel as 1714, is further confirmed as 1713 in the records of the Council of Ten,'
which, on 22 February (the last day of Carnival), ordered Heinichen to turn over the originale of the
work to its representative according to a prior agreement.'"4

@ Elena Croce Viviani took the role of Calphurnias. In the opening scene the Roman phalanges advanced
to the sound of trumpets and drums (famburi). Members of the orchestra seeking payment for their
performance in Calfurnia in 1713 were Giovanni Canciani, Giovanni Meneghin [violin], Antonio
Gabbiato [violin], Gio. Battista Moschini, Nadolin Bonamizi [Buonamici; cello], Iseppo who played
second keyboard, Ignazio [Siber] who played oboe, and Francesco Mazzoni.''S The musical skills of
enough members of this group are known to suggest the overall composition of three violins, viola,
cello, and violone with keyboard and obbligato oboe.'!

A Score in D-Dlb (aut.)
Listed as Bonlini 472; Groppo 476; Wiel 124; Alm 610

1713/4 La verita nell'inganno Music by Francesco Gasparini
[TRUTH IN DECEPTION]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani

im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1713-02-07~

" Calphurnias was destined to be the third wife of Caesar. (George Biilow reports in NGDMM/2 that the work was commissioned under the
title Mario).

'? T-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Pietro Paolo Bonis, Busta 1726, f. 90. Impatient members of the audience wanted refunds for their tickets,
which had serious financial repercussions for the impresari.

"8 Vio, Satira, p. 122. This appears to be the work (terza or ultima opera) for which the working score (originale) had, from 19 February,
to be entrusted to a representative of the Council of Ten and borrowed by the composer for each performance (I-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza
41, Fasc. 1712, document of 22 February 1712 [M.V.]).

" Loe. cit. See also the account of Fetis cited above.

"5 }.Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti P. P. de Bonis, Busta 1726, f. 95, entry of 20 [25] February 1712 [M.V.]. Further information on their dispute
with the theater management is also found in Atti Francesco Maria Bonaldi, Reg. 1901, f. 70, entry of 27 February 1712 [M.V.], and ser: cit.,
Reg. 1902, f. 10v, entry of 4 April 1713. The singers, as noted by Wiel, were Margarita Salvagnini, Elena Croce Viviani, [Maria] Angelica
Bracci, Angelica Rapparini, Orsola Astori Sticotti, Antonio Gaspari, Giuseppe Ignazio Ferrari, and Giovanni della Pagana detto Perella. Ferrari
also performed in the intermezzo Lisetta e Batto with Orsola Costa.

"6 Instrumental assignments provided in brackets are from E. Selfridge-Field, Venetian Instrumental Music, pp. 302 ff. The first harpsichordist
would have been the composer (maestro di musica) Heinichen.

314 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

a Dedicated to Domenico Grillo, Nob. Gen.
By his two marriages the Bithynian king Prusias had two sons  Nicomedes, who became an archenemy
of the Romans, and Atalos, who became an ally. Before his death Prusias arranged for the eventual
marriage of Atalos, his designated successor, with the Armenian princess Laodikeia. Atalos later fell
in love with the Assyrian princess Arsinoe, who was imprisoned by Laodikeia's father as she traveled
to her own wedding. In the battle that followed Nicomedes recovered the throne, thus restoring the
true line of succession.'"

OO The dedicatee had arrived in Venice by 21 January 1713 (NV). A license to print the libretto was issued
on 5 February 1712. Its dedication was dated 7 February 1713. Nicola Grimaldi took the role of Atalos,
with Maria Eleonora de Scio (La Todeschina) as Laodiceia, Vienna Mellini as Arsinoe, and Stefano
Romani (II Pignattino) as Nicomedes. Roberto Clerici, a pupil of Francesco Bibiena, designed and
painted the scenery. This was Gasparini's last opera for Venice before moving to Rome.

A Arias in D-Dlb
Listed as Bonlini 476; Groppo 480; Wiel 120; Alm 615

1713a Il trionfo di Pallade in Arcadia. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
 1713b Serenata (untitled) for Friedrich August. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
1713/5 Orlando furioso Music by Giovanni Alberto Ristori'*
[ROLAND IN A RAGE]
A dramma per musica Text by Grazio Braccioli
M1 Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With a danza SORTING DATE: 1713-11-09
a Dedicated to Scipione dal Sale'

Courtly life in the time of Charlemagne (eighth century) had been absent from the Venetian stage since
Carlo il Grande (1688/7). Braccioli's account contrasted two kinds of madness  Roland's crazed
love for Angelica and Ruggiero's spell-induced infatuation with the sorceress Alcina.' Orlando furioso
was rife with scenes related to the general theme of enchantment, which may have been stimulated
by the enthusiastic reception of Circe delusa (1711/5). Braccioli said in the libretto that he had tried
to steer an even course between delighting the ear with the story and the eye with visual interest. He
emphasized his fidelity to the Aristotelian unities of place and time, said that he was trying to restore
the importance of the actress in the title role, and wished to emphasize the transforming power of
passion and sentiment.

OOe Orlando furioso was first performed on 9 November 1713 (M); the libretto had been dedicated on the
7th.'?! Braccioli later claimed, in the libretto of Rodomonte sdegnato, that there had been more than
40 performances of Orlando furioso, and indeed the work was still in production on 13 January 1714
(NV). It is not clear who Braccioli's ideal actress was. The role of Angelica was sung by Anna Maria
Giusti (La Romanina), with the little-known Elisabetta Denzio as Bradamante, and Margherita Faccioli

"7 Silvani relates in a note to the reader that this work had been written eight years earlier for the same theater but then had been modified
to restrict the number of scene changes and adapt it to the activities of the virtuosi. Thus much had been added and much else cut. He credits
as earlier models of the verisimilitude he sought, particularly for Arsinoe's remorse, an old drama called Amore veleno e medicina
dell intelletto, a heroic work called Un pazzo guarisce I altro, and Seneca' s Ercole furiente. See also Laodicea in Egitto (Suppl. 3a, 1715).

"8 Ristori (c. 1692-1753) was the son of an actor (Tomaso) whose troupe spent many years at the court in Dresden. G. A. Ristori moved in
1715 to Dresden, which was his principal place of activity for the balance of his life.

" Dal Sale (also del Sale) was a Neapolitan count and may have been a patron of Domenico Scarlatti.
" Ortensio Scamacca had written a play on the subject of Orlando furioso in the 1630s (cf. Riccoboni, Histoire, p. 106).

"A license to print a dramma called Orlando furioso was issued on 3 March 1713. Since no author's name is given, it cannot be determined
whether it is the same as the Braccioli libretto set by G. A. Ristori for Sant' Angelo. An Orlando, overo La gelosa pazzia by Carlo Sigismondo
Capeci had been set by Domenico Scarlatti for private performance at the Polish court in 1711 (see Sartori 17485).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 315

as Alcina. Anton Francesco Carli sang in the title role. Orlando could well have helped to shape Vivaldi's
two treatments of the same subject (Orlando finto pazzo, 1714/4, and Orlando furioso, 1727/10).

 On 18 November the Vivaldis were cited by Giovanni Gallo, the impresario of the Teatro di Verona,
who said they had blockaded his season by signing up the singer Gio. Battista Minelli' for the role
of Ruggiero in the Orlando production. This culminated a week of sparring between notaries in Venice
and Verona, where Minelli had been engaged in August to perform with Gallo as impresario. Gallo
attempted to file suit on the 8th via Antonio Costanzi in Verona, then filed another claim on the 10th
in Venice. The Vivaldis responded on the 11th.' Minelli remained in the Venetian cast.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 478; Groppo 482; Wiel 122; Alm 617

1713/6 Irene augusta Music by Antonio Lotti
[IRENE THE AUGUST]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
MM Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1713-11-22
rai Without dedicatee
eX) The Byzantine emperor Leo [457-474], in concluding a war with the Bulgarians, arranged for the

Bulgarian princess Eudoxa to marry his only son, Constantine. After Leo's death, the Greek prince
Nikephoros, as a regent to the young imperial prince, attempted to wrest control of the regime. He
persuaded him to renounce his vow to Eudoxa, much to the consternation of his widowed mother, Irene.
Irene was first performed, with applause, on 22 November 1713 (M, NV). Santa Stella sang in the
title role, with Giuseppe Maria Boschi as Nicephoros and Francesco Bernardi (II Senesino) as
Constantine. As the work opens, Constantine is being entertained in the royal apartment of Theodate,
in whom Nikephoros has encouraged him to take an amorous interest. Instrumentalists and singers perform
on two conch shells.
A Arias in D-Dlb (prima)
Listed as Bonlini 477; Groppo 481; Wiel 118; Alm 616

1714/1 Semiramide' Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[SEMIRAMIS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1714-01-06
& Dedicated to Carlo Caraffa'TM*

Semiramis, the wife of Memnon and the queen of Babylonia in the ninth century BC, became a heroine
when she captured and imprisoned Zoroaster, the king of Bactria.'* Ninus, the king of the Assyrians,
paid her great respect but the ultimate consequences were tragic.

2 Cited in Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, 38; original documentation (I-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Pietro Paolo de Bonis, Busta 1727, item of
8 November 1713) recently located by Micky White.

'3 Details kindly supplied by Micky White from diverse sources in I-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti P. P. De Bonis, Buste 1727 and 4027.

"4 Caraffa, the duke of Madaloni, was a Neapolitan. With the prince of Sonnino, he was en route to Vienna in January 1714. The party did
not, however, stop in Venice, where accommodations had been arranged with the canons of San Salvatore (A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1714, entry of
20 Genaro).

5 The possible historical frameworks for tales surrounding Semiramis are numerous and stretch back to the third millennium BC. A comprehensive
account of them is given by Don Neville in GO, iv, 311.

316

OOo

fi

 1714a
1714/2

TT

ate)

1714/3

ry

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Semiramide is said to have opened on 6 January 1714 (M),' although since the 6th was the feast of
Epiphany, the Sth or 7th is more probable. Few foreigners attended because the transalpine passes were
blocked. A license to print the libretto had been issued on 30 December 1714 [sic]. The title-page was
dated 1713. Santa Stella appeared in the title role, with Francesco Bernardi (II Senesino) as Ninus/Nino
and Giovanni Paita as Zoroaster. On the 13th the work was said to be attracting a larger audience than
the work [Orlando furioso] at Sant' Angelo.'? A scene showing the temple of the Sun (a staple
representation of Zoroastrianism) occurred in Act Two. Silvani's text provided what came to be an
inordinately popular subject in the eighteenth century and beyond. It had been preceded by Moniglia's
very different account for P. A. Ziani (1670/4).

Arias in D-Dlb (seconda)
Listed as Bonlini 479; Groppo 483; Wiel 128; Alm 619, 620

La Merope. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Rodomonte sdegnatoTM Music by Michel Angelo Gasparini
[RODOMONTE DISDAINED]

A dramma per musica Text by Grazio Braccioli
Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1714-01-20

Dedicated to Giuseppe Maria Gonzaga'

Turning again to Ariosto for his model, Braccioli's subject is a group of murderous women who band
together. Rhadamanthys/Rodomonte, the king of Sparta, married Aleria, the queen of this group. As
in Orlando furioso (1713/5), magic was an important ingredient of the work. The action took place
in Alexandria, where a siege was in progress as the work opened. Unlike many of his predecessors,
Braccioli seemed to take pride in writing a text expressly for a dramma per musica rather than a tragedy
per se, although he advertised his adherence to Aristotelian precepts. He noted the ability of the dramma
per musica to reinvigorate good taste and commented on how much greater he found the pleasure
of actually hearing and seeing his works performed than he had in reading their texts.

The libretto was dedicated by the impresario (Vivaldi) on 20 January 1714, which was the date on which
the work opened (CO, M, NV). A license to print the libretto was issued on 15 January 1713 (M.V.).
The writer of NV hoped the work would enjoy applause because of the special nature of the music
but admitted that bad weather was driving foreigners out of Venice and that San Giovanni Grisostomo
was attracting most of the crowds with Semiramide. Anton Francesco Carli sang in the title role.

Arias in D-Dlb (seconda)!
Listed as Bonlini 480; Groppo 484; Wiel 127; Alm 621, 622

Pallade trionfante in Arcadia' Music by Gio. Alberto Ristori!
[PALLAS TRIUMPHANT IN ARCADIA]

A dramma pastorale per musica Text attributed to Otto Mandelli'*!
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

Carnival and that the Teatro di S. Giovanni Grisostomo had opened ultimamente. Groppo (MS p. 173) indicated that there were two versions
of the libretto and claimed that the work was given both in 1713 and in 1714. No confirmation of the first date has been found.

"7 1-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 164, f. 17v.

"8 Prince of Guastalla. In 1702 the Guastalla branch of the Gonzaga, uprooted from their lands by war, had taken refuge in Venice. Vitali
postulates (I nove principi, p. 80) that Giuseppe Maria was the melancholic dedicatee of the original version (c. 1715) of Vivaldi's concerto
RV 574. Prince Antonio di Guastalla, who was en route to Florence, had arrived in Venice by 3 February 1714 (NV, N. 164, f. 51v).

 The first aria given in D-Dlb, Mus. I-F-30 (Aimables zefir) is in French!

 Incorrectly attributed to Michel Angelo Gasparini in Wiel (Teatri, p. 38).

5! 4 count by whom this is the only libretto known.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 317

With balli and cori SORTING DATE: 1714-01-27
Dedicated to the Ladies and Gentlemen of Venice!

Part of ancient Arcadia was consecrated to the goddess Persephone/Proserpina, but the shepherds of
this work, being unaware of this history, dedicated it to the goddess Pallas. This infuriated the Infernal
Goddess, but after being touched by the branch ofa magic olive tree, her vengeful wishes were rendered
mute, and Pallas prevailed. A license to print this short libretto was issued on 27 January 1713 [M.V.]
for Carn. 1714.'3 The work had been given the preceding summer in Padua at the Teatro Obizzi,
with the Vicentine singer Laura Soranzo in the roles of both Pallas and Persephone.'TM*

 Although it is not possible to say with certainty what the relationship of Pallade trionfante in Arcadia
was to the pastoral called // trionfo di Pallade in Arcadia,'* it seems likely that II trionfo (San Samuele,
autumn 1713; cf. Suppl. 3a) was not fully set to music.'* The winter work had as actors two shepherds
(Nicandro and Aminta), three shepherdesses (Lisa, Leucia, and Dorina), the two goddesses, and three
choruses (of nymphs, of shepherds, and of Furies). Tomaso Ristori, the composer's father and the leader
ofacomedy troupe resident chiefly in Dresden, wrote the dedication of both works; Gio. Alberto Ristori
is cited as a composer only in the libretto for the winter production.

OB

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 481; Groppo 485; Wiel 133; Alm 623

1714/4 Orlando finto pazzo Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[ROLAND PRETENDING TO BE MAD]
A dramma per musica Text by Grazio Braccioli
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1714-11-11~
& Dedicated to Prince Karl, Margrave of Baden-Baden'*'

The enchantress Ersilla'* had imprisoned numerous cavallieri in her castle. Roland's magic sword
made him invulnerable to her powers. She created havoc by tricking his friend Brandimarte into believing
he was Roland.'* Roland went mad, entered the temple of Hecate, killed his guard, and stole the statue
of Merlin which had been the source of Alcina's power. The spell of Alcina was broken by Brandimarte
when he slipped on a magic ring. Margherita Gualandi sang in the role of Ersilla, with Elisabetta Denzio
as Tigrinda. As in 1713/5, Anton Francesco Carli took the title role.

'? The dedication was by Tomaso Ristori, the impresario of the theater.

'83 A fede written on 17 September 1713 is also preserved for II trionfo di Pallade in Arcadia, a pastoral intended for performance in Autumn
1713. This corresponds to a libretto preserved in I-Vcg. The autumn work was dedicated to Gio. Carlo Grimani. Ristori is cited as the composer
in a manuscript note in the libretto in US-BEu.

'4 Sartori 17712.
5 Alm 618.

'56 For this reason it is listed in Suppl. 3a. Ristori's strong connection with improvised commedia reinforces the notion of a crossover genre.
The libretto for the autumn work (Sartori 24028), which was dedicated to Gio. Carlo Grimani, the owner of San Samuele, contained the same
plot summary as the winter work, but the cast requirements were significantly different. The interlocutors of the autumn work included the
shepherds Nicandro and Ergasto, with five commedia dell arte characters  Carino, Rosetta, Coviello, Trufaldino, and Brighella.

'57 The prince was a general of the imperial army. He was also the employer of Giuseppe Boniventi from 1712 until c. 1717. He had commanded
troops in South Germany in the War of the Spanish Succession, so this dedication can be regarded as a victory tribute. The prince's brother,
Karl III Wilhelm of Baden-Durlach, founded the new city of Karlsruhe in 1715, following the Peace of Baden (1714). The relatively ancient
city of Baden-Baden had been destroyed by hostilities in 1689.

'88 A textual lapse in the note to the reader suggests that Ersilla may have been based on Falsirena, a temptress who figured prominently in
Marino's Adone, a widely read elaboration of the myth of Venus and Adonis (1623). A musical setting of the story by M. A. Ziani, Falsirena
(text by Rinaldo Cialli), had been given at Sant'Angelo as 1690/4.

'39 The plot, minus the simulated madness, was credited to Boiardo.

318

o

1714/5

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

The libretto was dedicated on 10 November 1714'* and the work is likely to have opened soon afterward.
Braccioli's text had been the basis for Ristori's setting (Orlando furioso; 1713/5). Despite its portrayal
of pastoral features, this version of Orlando gives equal emphasis to the lugubrious. A chorus of priests
of Hecate and ministers from the temple of Pluto appear in the opening scene. Nymphs and fauns are
featured in the stage action of later portions of the work. The third act is rich in images, with crystal
sets in Ersilla's magic grotto, which is ringed by instrumentalists.

Score in I-Tn;"! arias in D-B, SHs

Listed as Bonlini 483; Groppo 487; Wiel 126; Alm 625; RV 727

Orlando furioso Music attributed to Gio. Alberto Ristori,
[ROLAND IN A RAGE] rev. Antonio Vivaldi!
A dramma per musica Text by Grazio Braccioli
Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a danza SORTING DATE: 1714-12-26~

Dedicated to Angelo and Annibale Marsigli Rossi!

This revision of 1713/5 probably opened after Christmas. The libretto was dedicated on 1 December
1714." As described in the libretto, the staging was now to be lighter, brighter, more sumptuous, and
perhaps more subtle in its interpretation than in Ristori's original. The work opened in Alcina's enchanted
palace, where two fountains had the power to ignite or extinguish love. The second act, which culminated
in the wedding of Angelica and Medoro, emphasized woods, mountains, flowers, and breezes. The
temple of Hecate, which revealed a statue of the famous magician Merlin and an urn containing his
ashes, was featured in the third act.

This must be the work which J. F. A. von Uffenbach, a nobleman from Frankfurt who arrived in Venice
on 2 February 1715, reported on the 4th to have seen at Sant' Angelo.'* He declared the performance
of [Anna Maria] Fabbri (Alcina) to have been incomparable." As in 1713/5, Carli and Denzio took
the roles of Orlando and Bradamante. Margherita Gualandi succeeded Anna Maria Giusti as Angelica,
and three other substitutions were made to the cast.'* His greatest praise was for the incidental violin
music of Vivaldi. Uffenbach related that towards the end Vivaldi played a splendid solo which absolutely
amazed me, because there has never been (nor could one image there ever being) such a manner of
playing: he made his fingers jump to within a hair's breadth of the bridge, leaving virtually no space
for the bow, on all four strings with imitations [between them], at incredible speed."*

Score (Acts 1, 2) in I-Tn; aria in D-Dlb

Listed as Bonlini 484; Groppo 488; Wiel 125; Alm 626; RV Anh. 84

No such fede has been retrievable in I-Vas in recent years.

| Transcribed by the late Ulysses S. Roseman, Jr., in his UCLA Master's thesis, Orlando finto pazzo, 2 vols., 1989. The work was produced
in London in August 2000 from the edition of Bill Bankes-Jones and Orlando Jopling, and also in Venice (September 2000) from the edition
of Alessandro Borin. Detailed commentary on the sources can be found in Pancino, Le opere, i.

 Vivaldi reset twenty-two arias from Ristori's work (1713/5; see Hill, Orlando, p. 329). Alm and others cite Ristori alone as the composer.

8 Noblemen from Bologna.

'4 Eric Cross in GO gives 17 December 1714 as the dedication date.

5 Preussner, Die musikalische Reisen, pp. 67f. The performance was ostensibly on the 3rd, although Carnival opened on the 4th.

'* It is not, however, safe to assume that the observation referred exclusively to Orlando furioso. Fabbri also appeared in Orlando finto pazzo
(1714/4) and in Lucio papirio (1715/1).

7 Apparently because the previous members had been recruited to sing at SS. Giovanni e Paolo. See 1714/6.

8 Preussner, op. cit., pp. 67f.

1714/6

1714/7

m1

a
O

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 319

Marsia deluso Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[MARSYAS DELUDED]

A favola pastorale (5) Text attributed to Agostino Piovene
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1714-12-26~
Without dedicatee

In this pastoral fable, Piovene combined two myths  that of Daphne, a nymph from Thessaly, and
Marsyas, a Phrygian satyr. Disguised as a shepherd, Apollo, who is in love with Daphne, kills a serpent
to save her from harm. Gio. Battista Cavana took the role of Marsyas, with Anna Ambrevil (in her debut)
as Daphne and Pietro Casati as Apollo. Three other singers  Agata Landi, Gio. Battista Minelli, and
Pietro Ramponi  had made their debuts in Ristori's Orlando furioso (1713/5).

Bonlini and Groppo' point out that SS. Giovanni e Paolo was reopened in the winter of 1714-15 in
substitution for San Giovanni Grisostomo, which was closed in mourning for Gio. Carlo Grimani.'?
Marsia appears to have preceded the only other work (Polidoro) given during the brief reopening of
the theater. The title-page refers to the carnovale dell'Anno 1714, which in isolation could refer to
the preceding year. Taking 1715, when San Giovanni Grisostomo did not open until after Christmas
(see 1715/8) as model, a likely date of opening for Marsia would have been just after Christmas 1714.'*!
Owing to long periods of quarantine, 1714-15 was a lackluster season, with sparse attendance at Carnival,
in any event.

The use of music by Pollarolo suggests a hasty arrangement made by Grimani's heirs to employ the
well-regarded house composer of San Giovanni Grisostomo. Francesco Bernardi (II Senesino), who
appeared in the title role, and Giuseppe Boschi (Darete) had both performed in Semiramide, a popular
work which played at San Giovanni Grisostomo through the heart of Carnival in 1714. Marsyas was
credited with the invention of the double flute, but there is no evidence here of the use of a flute.
Arias in D-Dlb (prima)

Listed as Bonlini 485; Groppo 489; Wiel 130; Alm 627

GI' amici rivali' Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[THE FRIENDS WHO WERE RIVALS]

A favola pastorale Text attributed to Giovanni Battista Neri
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With danze SORTING DATE: 1714-12-29~

Dedicated to Faustino Avogardo!*

The libretto for Gl amici, which was a thinly disguised remake of L enigma disciolto (1705/2),' was
dedicated by the impresario Giovanni Orsato in December 1714. It appears to have preceded L amante
impazzito (1715/3). The production was probably chaotic. Of the five singers in the cast, three cannot
be associated with any other work given in Venice. A fourth, Anna Maria Armida (La Mantovana),
who took the role of Eurilla, is otherwise known only from notarial records. On 7 February 1715 she
was accused by Orsato of having failed to appear on time, of having thrown temper tantrums (gravi
capricci) both at rehearsals and at performances, and of not having been adequately prepared for the
opening.'**

 Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 169; Groppo MS, p. 175.
'S Giovanni Carlo died on 22 June 1714 (Saunders, Repertoire, p. 3).

'S! This is in fact the date given by Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 783) on uncertain authority.

152

A Brescian noble.

3 Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 170.
'54 TVas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Antonio Ciola, Busta 4028, item of 7 Febraro 1714 M.V.

320

A

 1714b
1715/1

A

 17152
1715/2

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

No musical sources known
Listed as Wiel 132; Bonlini 487; Groppo 491; Alm 629

Calisto in orsa. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Lucio Papirio Music by Luca Antonio Predieri'
[Lucius PaPIRIUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Salvi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1715-01-12~

Dedicated to Karl Josef Novohradski, Count of Kollororath'

The dictator Lucius Papirius was opposed by the cavalry general Quintus Fabius, who defeated him
in battle. Lucius threatened violent forms of retaliation, but Quintus Fabius was saved by his father
Marcus. Anton Francesco Carli sang in the title role, with Andrea Pacini (Quinto Fabio), and Florido
Matteucci (Marco Fabio). Elisabetta Denzio sang as the tribune (Appio).

The winter of 1714-15 coincides not only with a low ebb in theatrical activity in Venice (owing to the
recent death of Gio. Carlo Grimani) but also with a hiatus in news sources. Only circumstantial evidence
of dating is available. The impresario for this production was Antonio Vivaldi, who wrote an undated
dedication. An anonymous note to the reader says that for two years I have served your pleasure in
the theater. This represents three years of service, if one counts from the formalized contract made
in the summer of 1712.'' Elisabetta Denzio first worked at Sant' Angelo in 1713-14. Andrea Pacini
sang at Sant' Angelo only in 1714-15; he went to San Giovanni Grisostomo in 1715-16.

The text of Lucio, which was known from performances in Florence and Rome 1714, survived in various
guises until the end of the eighteenth century. Roughly half of its numerous productions were in Florence
or neighboring locales.

Arias (Florence, 1714) in GB-Lbl

Listed as Bonlini 486; Groppo 490; Wiel 137; Alm 628

Laodicea in Egitto. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Polidoro Music attributed to Antonio Lotti
[POLYDOROS]

A tragedia in musica (5) Text attributed to Agostino Piovene
Performed at SS. Giovanni e Paolo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and a coro SORTING DATE: 1715-02-04~
Without dedicatee

In Euripides' account, Priam asked his youngest son, Polydoros, to carry gold to the kingdom of Thrace
for safe-keeping, but after the fall of Troy its king, Polymnestor, killed Polydoros in order to steal the
gold. Here the librettist has modified the story to include Andromache's flight from Pyrrhos, the son

'SS The Bolognese composer L. A. Predieri (1688-1767) was evidently adaptable. He was known as a violinist and violist early in his career.
He was elected to the Accademia Filarmonica in 1716 and was to serve as its prince in 1723. He was well regarded in church and theater circles
in Bologna. From 1737 to 1751 he served the imperial court at Vienna, first as vice Kapellmeister and, from 1741, as full Kapellmeister. A
number of his operas involved texts from Spanish history. The presence of a Slavic patron here lends credibility to rumors that Predieri went
to Russia, which could be a generic term for Eastern Europe.

'S6 Geographical implication ambiguous. The place-name Novohrad (not Nomohrad as found in the libretto) occurs in both Slovakia and Ukraine.

'S7 See the petition of Gio. Battista and Antonio Vivaldi for a box in the theater for 1712-13 in I-Vas, Giudice de' Forestier, Busta 78, entry
of 6 zugno [Giugno] 1712 (document kindly provided by don Gastone Vio). The large hole in Sant' Angelo's schedule between early December
1714 and mid-February 1715 would suggest that this work opened after Christmas.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 321

of Achilles. She has fallen in love with Deiphilos/Deifilo, the son of Polymnestor, who has disguised
himself as Polydoros.'**
oo A license to print the libretto was dated 22 January 1714 for Carn. 1714, but it is preserved with
(unbound) records for 1715. The title-page is dated 1714.'* If Bonlini's claim' that SS. Giovanni e
Paolo was re-opened only temporarily to fill the void left by the temporary closure of San Giovanni
Grisostomo is taken at face value, then the correct year must have been 1714 M.V. In 1715, Polidoro
should have opened around 4 February when, according to the papal legate, Carnival officially began.'*!
Six of the eight singers in Marsia deluso appeared in Polidoro. Francesco Bernardi sang in the title
role. The final act takes place in the subterranean temple of Pluto, where the arches are lined with gold.
A Score in I-Ne; arias in D-Dlb (seconda'); GB-BC
Listed as Bonlini 488; Groppo 492; Wiel 129; Alm 630

1715/3 L'amante impazzito Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini (1),
[THE CRAZED LOVER] Carlo Fr. Pollarolo (2), and Francesco Ballarotti (3)
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Marc' Antonio Gasparini
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1715-02-04~
& Dedicated to Domenico Delai
ad

This pastoral work, which was based on quasi-historical themes, concerns the heroic love of Alkiades,

the brother of Admetos, the king of Thessaly, for Clodomira.' It had been given under the titles

L'Alciade (Bergamo, 1709) and La violenza d'amore (Dolo, 1711). According to Groppo, booksellers

had cut the frontispieces from the libretti of those works in order to recycle the texts.'

OL The absence of other productions at San Fantin allows that L'amante impazzito could have had
performances in the autumn of 1714, but circumstantial evidence suggests that it followed the production
of Glamici rivali (1714/7). In fact, it could have opened near 4 February, when Carnival was officially
opened, but in that case it would have run for only a few days. In a stragiudiziale filed on 7 February
1714 M.V. the impresario Giovanni Orsato complained that the singer Anna Maria Armida (La
Mantovanina), who was obligated to participate in numerous rehearsals and performances, had fled
the city, depriving him, as impresario, of the expected return on his investment in her and in the
production.' The only other Venetian production in which Armida is known to have sung was that
of Gl'amici rivali (1714/7), which therefore must have preceded this work.

A No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 482; Groppo 486; Wiel 131; Alm 624

1715/4 Nerone fatto Cesare' Music by Antonio Vivaldi, eight others'
[NERO MADE EMPEROR]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Matteo Noris

M1 Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

'88 Polydoros had been the subject of a tragedy in verse by Pomponio Torelli in the later sixteenth century (cf. Riccoboni, Histoire, p. 118).
'8 Groppo and Alm list it as a 1715 work; Wiel, following the libretto, lists it as a 1714 work.

 Op. cit., p. 169; commentary concerning Marsia deluso.

| -Rvat, AS, NV, N. 165, entry of 2 February 1715.

 Since Giovanni Orsato was the impresario for this work, the unlikely name Alciade is in character with the sketchiness of the plot. This
work bears nothing in common with the Alciade of 1666/9.

8 Groppo MS, p. 174.
14 T_Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti A. Ciola, Busta 4028.

5 In addition to Vivaldi's twelve arias, the work included material by A. Pollarolo (1 aria), F. Gasparini (1), G. A. Perti (2), G. M. Orlandini
(2), A. Carli (1), Fr. Pistocchi (1), P. Pignatta (1), and nine anonymous arias [by N. N. = nomen nescio].

322 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

With violin solos between the acts SORTING DATE: 1715-02-19~
& Without dedicatee
 This pastiche was based on Noris's text as set by Perti (1692/8). A note to the reader says, hyperbolically,

that the work has been modernized to accommodate the current taste for one of the happiest of dramatic
ideas. A license to print the libretto was issued on 12 February 1714 (M.V.).' The work may not
have opened until the 19th. It was given in Brescia the following year. Uffenbach heard this work
(Agrippina) performed on the 19th, the 26th, and 4 March. He related that Vivaldi (the composer
of twelve of the arias) played long violin solos on the third occasion, which would have been on the
evening preceding Shrove Tuesday. On the second occasion he played only one aria.'' Margherita
Gualandi sang as Agrippina with Anna Maria Fabbri (Nerone) and Anton Francesco Carli (Seneca).
Uffenbach found the costumes a significant distraction. He said that Fabbri was in French garb, with
the others variously in Spanish and Persian dress. It was the first work in which Fabbri was cast in a
male role. By the 1730s the practice was prevalent at Sant' Angelo.'

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 489; Groppo 493; Wiel 138; Alm 631; RV 724

 1715b La pazzia d'Orlando. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

1715/5 Laomedonte Music attributed to Lorenzo Baseggio
[LAOMEDON]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Battista Guizzardi'
MM Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1715-10-26~
&o Dedicated to Giovanni Martinengo'
 Laomedon was a mythical king of Crete who ordered that his daughter Dalinda be drowned. The servant

who carried out the king's wish tied a rope around her waist and threw her into the sea, from which
she was rescued by Polydoros.'! A license to print the libretto was issued on 14 October 1715. The
libretto was dedicated on 19 October 1715 by the impresari Pietro Denzio and Giovanni (Zuanne)
Orsato.' The opera houses were expected to open shortly after the 19th (NV).
 This was the first work given at San Moise since 1693.' It marked the beginning of a period of
considerable activity, much of it focused on lighter works directed by Pietro Denzio.' The principal
' The title-page is dated 1715.

'S7 Preussner, op. cit., pp. 67-70. This was a disappointment to Uffenbach, to whom Vivaldi gave a private demonstration of his inimitable
fantasie on 6 March and delivered ten concerti grossi on the 9th. Since Vivaldi later claimed (1736) that he only played solos for first performances
[and in this case probably also final performances], the 19th would seem the probable date for the premiere of this work.

68 In the meantime, women had begun to be cast in male roles elsewhere. Handel, for example, cast Margherita Durastante as the hero in Radamisto
(HWV 12a; London, 1720), but the register remained a soprano one (taken over in later productions by Francesco Bernardi).

' Guizzardi is cited by numerous bibliographers. Wiel's basis for stating that the libretto was by Gio. Battista Ruperti (Gnapeta) cannot
be determined.

"9 A Venetian administrator in Vicenza. The Martinengo family joined the Venetian nobility in 1684 (US-CAh, MS Ital. 112, f. 137).
7 In most accounts, Laomedon was one of the first kings of Troy and the father of Hesione.

'? Denzio's responsibilities were summarized ina legal document from the end of the winter season, when methods of and priorities for payment
were brought before the Council of Ten. Denzio was to give all the money collected each night from the rental of folding chairs and boxes
as well as the sale of tickets to Pietro Belli. He was not to give any money directly to singers or instrumentalists who performed in the theater.
The implication of the final sentence (I-Vas, CX, Filza 42, entry of 19 Febraro 1715 [M.V.]) is that ifthe performers were paid from performance
to performance, they would have been tempted to appear irregularly.

"3 The gap left by the death of Gio. Carlo Grimani and the final closure of SS. Giovanni e Paolo may have encouraged the re-opening of San
Moise as an opera house. (SS. Giovanni e Paolo stood empty until 1748, when it was converted into an oil warehouse.)

' According to a notary's records, Denzio had been living at Santa Maria Formosa since 1712 (I-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti P. P. Bonis,
Reg. 1744, ff. 14, 34; Reg. 1745, ff. 264, 299, 324; Reg. 1754, ff. 60v, 152v, 153v; records concerning Antonio Denzio can be found in Reg.
1772, f. 112v).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 323

instigator of the theater's reopening was Almore Giustinian. The cast of singers was entirely new to
Venice. Most were, like Denzio, from Bologna, although Rosa Ambrevil (Dalinda) was from Modena.
Antonio Denzio! made his Venetian debut in the title role.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 490; Groppo 494; Wiel 134; Alm 632

 1715c Il grande intreccio cagionato dal doppio inganno. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1715/6 Alessandro fra le amazzoni Music by Fortunato Chelleri!
[ALEXANDER AMONG THE AMAZONS]
A dramma per musica Text by Grazio Braccioli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With a giuoco, a ballo, and a coro SORTING DATE: 1715-10-27
a Dedicated to Karl Philipp, Electoral Prince of Bavaria!
 According to the author of this fanciful plot, Alexander the Great wished to be taken for a son of Jupiter.

The librettist apologized for the anachronisms that flowed from creating a unity of action. In his account
Talestri, the queen of the Amazons,'* was in love with the great military conqueror. Alessandro opened
on 27 October 1715 with not a little applause.! A license to print the libretto had been issued on
the 21st. It was still running on 26 December (NV). Although the prince's arrival was anticipated in
November, quarantine prevented it until early January 1716 (NV).'*

Ow Antonio Archi appeared in the role of Alexander with Diamanta Scarabelli (Ta/estri), Margherita Gualandi
(Statira), and Costanza Maccari (Camilla). The incidental entertainments included games of arms,
inventions, a concerto by the maestro Alberto Bruni, and choruses of Amazons and Macedonians.
Chelleri's fee was approximately 200 ducats.'*! The scenery, by Bernardo Canal, featured a salon of
pictures and stuccos in Act One.

Ai No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 491; Groppo 495; Wiel 139; Alm 633

1715/7 La fede tradita e vendicata Music by Francesco Gasparini'
[FAITH BETRAYED AND VINDICATED]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani

im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1715-11-16~

"5 The tenor Antonio Denzio was later (1724) to collaborate with Antonio Maria Peruzzi in forming a Venetian troupe to give Italian operas
in Prague. Denzio negotiated with Count Sporek and organized the first productions (Freeman, Opera Theater, pp. 22-27).

"6 Chelleri (c. 1690-1757), an Italian of German origin who was currently serving the Elector Palatine as maestro di cappella, may have been
in the company of Albinoni in Florence in c. 1703. At the time of this production Chelleri held a box at Sant' Angelo (unpublished research
by Gastone Vio).

'"' The electoral prince arrived in Venice only on 3 February 1716 (CO). He had been entertained en route by stalwarts of the Arcadian movements
 Scipione Maffei in Verona, Marc' Antonio Tressino in Vicenza, and Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti in Padua. His entourage filled four ferries
(burchielli). See also 1716/1.

"8 4 pseudonym here for Hippolyte.

9 1_Vas, IS, Avvisi, Busta 713, Fasc. Pallade veneta, week of 22 Ottobre-2 Novembre, f. lv: La sera della domenica usci fra |' Amazzoni
il Grande Alessandro sulle scene di Sant' Angelo, va presentato ivi musicalmente, il quale riesce di non poco applauso.

8 He was to be received by the doge on | February 1715 [M.V.] (Baschet, Historie, p. 485).
'8! See the commentary for L amor di figlio (1716/1).

' The libretto attributes the work merely to Gasparini.

324

OO

fi

 1715d
1715/8

1716/1

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Dedicated to Count Antonio della Porta'?

In this revival of 1704/1 some of the names of the characters have been changed, ostensibly to
accommodate the music. A license to print the libretto was issued on 13 November 1715. The libretto
itself was dedicated on the 15th by the new impresari Pietro Denzio and Giovanni Orsato. The work
is likely to have opened within the next few days. This is apparently also the work which reopened
on 26 December (NV). The Paduan Filippo Piccoli sang as Ricimer, with Rosa d' Ambreville as Hedwig
(Edvige), his intended. Members of the supporting cast were principally from Bologna. Silvani's text
was also set by Orlandini (Genoa, 1709; Bologna, 1712), Vivaldi (Venice, 1726/3), and Antonio Bioni
(Wroctaw, 1729) among others.

Score (Act Two only'TM) in D-Hs

Listed as Bonlini 492; Groppo 496; Wiel 135; Alm 634

Sesosti. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Foca superbo" Music attributed to Antonio Lotti
[PHOCAS THE SUPERB]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Maria Lucchini'
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1715-12-26

Dedicated to Karl, Landgrave of Hesse!*

The historical Phocas murdered Maurice in 602 to gain control of the Eastern Roman Empire. He ruled
until 610. Perhaps to suit a German dedicatee, this account was tangled with anachronistic tales of Otto
the Great, his son Otto, and Otto's beloved Honoria. The action took place in Calabria. A license to
print the libretto was issued on 13 December 1715. The dedication date of the libretto, 26 December
1715, was the date of the first performance (A, NV). The title-page was dated 1716. The work was
performed with specially chosen singers and enjoyed full applause.'' Stefano Romano (Otto) sang
with Vienna Mellini (Onoria). Two of the remaining singers  Annibale and Anna Maria Fabbri 
were in the employ of the dedicatee.

Score and arias in D-Dlb (prima); arias in GB-BC

Listed as Bonlini 493; Groppo 497; Wiel 145; Alm 635

L'amor di figlio non conosciuto" Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[LOVE FOR AN UNRECOGNIZED SON]

A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1716-01-04~

Dedicated to Karl-Albrecht, Electoral Prince of Bavaria!*

Here Tigranes was an unknown son of Thomyris, the queen of the Massagetes. He fell in love with
Meroe, his mother's enemy. A license to print the libretto for L amor was issued on 8 December 1715;
the title-page was dated 1715. L amor is likely to have opened early in the new year, perhaps on 4 January

'83 Not identifiable, although the architect of the same name (1631-1702) had been responsible for planning the Erlangen (Bavaria) Neustadt
at the turn of the century. Given the recent arrival of a Bavarian delegation, it is possible that this was a descendant, particularly since work
on a theater at Erlangen was begun in 1715 under Margrave Christian Ernst. (It was a rarity for recycled works to be dedicated at all.)

'4 From a production in Turin (1719). Sartori attributes the music to Gasperini.

'85 T ucchini was to be active principally at Sant' Angelo and San Moise.

'86 Previously the dedicatee of 1700/1. His son Frederick would become king of Sweden in 1720.

'87 Pallade veneta, p. 281. Among the singers were Stefano Romano (II Pignattino) and Anna Maria Fabbri.

'8 The prince (1697-1745) now traveled under the assumed name of the count of Stravitz (NV). His arrival in Venice on 3 February (CO)
would have prevented him from seeing this work performed. He was to serve as elector of Bavaria from 1726 to 1745 and as emperor (1742-45).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 325

or soon after. The dedicatee and his party, having set off for Venice before the middle of the month,
had only reached Trent by 28 December (NV), when Alessandro was still running at Sant' Angelo.
Antonio Archi (Cortoncino) took the role of Tigranes, with Diamante Scarabelli (Zomiri) and
Margherita Gualandi (Meroe). The reportedly beautiful Costanza Maccari (Oronte) was making her
first appearance in Venice since her debut in 1705.

 L'amor di figlio was substituted for Chelleri's setting of Amalasunta (eventually given as 1718/11)
after Chelleri refused to reset the vocal parts to suit the ranges of Margherita Gualandi and Costanza
Maccari unless he was paid an extra 50 ducats.' A short run and the fact that L amor was followed
by a revival (1716/2) suggest that its reception was poor.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 494; Groppo 498; Wiel 136; Alm 636

1716/2 Il pid fedele fra i vassalli Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini
[THE MOST FAITHFUL OF THE VASSALS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
i Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1716-01-15~
& Without dedicatee
ce) This revival of 1703/3 was abridged. The result was recommended for its tender affects. A license

to print the libretto was issued on 10 January 1715 [M.V.] for Carn. 1716.! The run should have
opened around the start of Carnival (14 January 1716).'*' The cast included Anton Francesco Carli
(Tolomeo), Antonio Archi (Antioco), and Diamante Scarabelli (Arsinoe).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 495; Groppo 499; Wiel 143; Alm 637, 638

1716/3 La costanza trionfante degl'amori e degl'odiTM Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[CONSTANCY TRIUMPHANT]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Marchi
1 Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1716-01-19
we Dedicated to Pietro Emanuele Martinengo Colleone!TM
 The historic battle between Artabanos, king of the Parthians, and Tigranes, king of the Armenians, in

the second century BC is here fictionalized to include the unexpected participation of Mithridates, king
of Pontos. The action takes place in Armenia. The production ran from Wednesday 19 January until
Shrove Tuesday [25 February].' A license to print the libretto had been issued on 12 January 1715

' ].Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti G. Bellan, Busta 1917, item of 3 Gennaro 1715 M.V., citing a contract of 19 Agosto 1715. Chelleri was to
be paid a sum of 400 ducats for two works  Alessandro fra l'amazzoni (1715/6) and Amalasunta, regina de' goti (1718/11). Because he
refused to alter the roles assigned to Gualandi (Lauderio) and Maccari (Doriclea) without further compensation, Lodovici, saying he had been
informed of Chelleri's refusal on 19 December [the Atti of Francesco Maria Bonaldi are cited], withheld the honorarium for both works.
Amalasunta, which was completed by 2 December 1715 and was to have opened shortly after 10 January, was produced three years later.

' The title-page was dated 1716.
'! Wiel (Teatri, p. 43) was convinced by the identities of the cast that the work was given in the winter of 1715.

' Also marquis of Pianezza. Each of the three daughters of the thirteenth-century condottiere Bartolomeo Colleone married a Martinengo.
The last male heir of the Brescian Martinengo family died in 1682. This led to numerous disputes about heredity which peaked in 1746, when
the dedicatee of this work died. Although originally from Bergamo, the Colleone owned a palazzo near Santa Maria della Pace in Brescia.
Inc. 1670 it became the Oratory of San Filippo Neri and passed to the administration of Santa Maria della Pace, a church with which Vivaldi
had contacts. Some members of the Venetian Colleone family lived on the island of Murano. According to Groppo (MS, p. 178), one version
of the libretto had no dedicatee.

' Accounts for the last week of Carnival are preserved together with papers submitted to the Council of Ten by the impresario Pietro Denzio
(I-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Busta 42, item of 19 Febraro 1715 [M.V.]).

326 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

M.V.'TM The libretto itself was dedicated on 18 January 1715 M.V. The singular virtue of Vivaldi,
maestro de' concerti at the Ospedale della Pieta, was praised in a note to the reader. Antonio Denzio
sang as Artabanos with Filippo Piccoli as Tigranes.

 Daily attendance figures through the 25th were reported on the 27th. Ticket sales per day had totaled
305, 287, 285, 269, 310, 200, and 80. While the proceeds of rentals of scagni are given, numbers are
not. They increased the proceeds by nearly 50 per cent on the first two nights but fell off thereafter.
The total taken in from seven performances was 2841 grossi,10 lire, against expenses of 745 lire (roughly
150 ducats a night). The net proceeds were 2096 grossi,10 lire.'*> Vio computed the average cost of
aticket (across four price categories) as having been 5 lire, 25 soldi.' The highest sales were on Tuesday
the 20th, the lowest on Sunday the 25th. It was mandated at the start of the run that singers and
instrumentalists had to be paid before income could be directed in any other way.' On the 29th Denzio
renounced the practice of allowing singers and instrumentalists to rent boxes on credit.'** In May 1716
Carl' Antonio Mazza (Olderico) filed suit against the impresari Pietro Denzio and Giovanni Orsato
for lack of reimbursement for the theater-box he had sublet to King George I of England.'

- Obviously a popular work at its inception, La costanza was reworked many times, starting with its revival
at San Moise as Artabano, re de' Parti (RV 701; 1719/2). The exiled English court at Urbino went
en masse to Fano to see the work staged in February 1718. James III wrote to the duke of Lorraine in
March 1718 that the opera at Fano was much better than the one at Paris.? It was given as Artabano
(Mantua, 1725) and as a pastiche called Doriclea (RV 708; Prague, 1732). Some arias from La costanza
were also used by Antonio Denzio in a pastiche called La tirannia gastigata (RV Anh. 55; Prague,
1726), which was in the main based on Silvani's libretto for La fortezza in cimento. It was produced
at San Moise as L 'odio vinto dalla costanza (1731/5).

fi Arias in D-B; F-Pn; GB-BC (ultima)

Listed as Bonlini 496; Groppo 500; Wiel 150; Alm 639, 640; RV 706

1716/4 Il Germanico' Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[GERMANICUS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Pietro Giorgio Barziza
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1716-01-25~
& Dedicated to Giovanni Battista [Johann Baptist], Count of Colloredo-Waldsee*

The Roman general Germanicus defeated German tribes in a series of victories in the first century AD.
Barziza's tale (citing Tacitus) emphasizes the complications arising from Germanicus's having been

'4 Eric Cross gives 21 January 1715 [M.V.]as the date of the fede (i.e., censor's approval) in GO and Michael Talbot follows suit in NGDMM/2.
Girard and Rostirolla (Catalogo, pp. 276f) give 12 January, which is also my reading in I-Vas, Riformatori dello Studio di Padova, Filza
294 (1714-18).

'5 1-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 42, Fasc. 1715 [sic], report of 27 Febraro 1715 [M.V.].
'6 Gastone Vio, private communication.
' Loc. cit., item of 29 Febraro 1715 [M.V.].

'%8 Loc. cit., item of 29 Febraro 1715 [M.V.]. It appears that the purpose of musicians' obtaining boxes was to sublet them for higher sums
than those for which they had been rented.

'9 ].Vas, CX, Notatorio, Busta 42, order signed by Antonio Peretti and countersigned by Pietro Denzio and Giovanni Orsato on 16 Maggio
1716; the payment was due in July. The king (1660-1727), who had previously been Prince Georg Ludwig of Brunswick, was styled His Brittanic
Majesty of Brunswick (Sua Maesta Brettanica di Bransuich). Mazza, the apparent lessee of the box, sang only during the year 1715-16 at
San Moise.

2 Corp, Stuart Court, pp. 356f.

2! Colloredo had taken up his post as imperial ambassador in Venice late in the preceding year but had not yet been officially installed. He
gave a magnificent feast for General Schulenburg on 12 January 1716 (NV). According to the librettist's dedication here, the heroic character

which the audience would find in the character of Germanicus was the same as that admired in the dedicatee's grand spirit.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 327

adopted by Caesar Augustus. Upon his triumphant return to Rome [c. 18 AD], Germanicus was to become
the subject of a plot laid by his envious step-brother, Tiberius.

oe A license to print the libretto was issued on 17 January 1715 M.V. for 1716. The libretto itself was
dedicated on 24 January 1716. The production would have followed shortly, since it was the second
of three post-Christmas offerings at the theater. Stefano Romani took the title role, with Andrea Pacini
as Tiberius. The composer's noted virtue was mentioned in the libretto. The work opened with the
coronation of Tiberius on the Circus Maximus, where several spectacles were in progress. The two
balli featured courtesans, in the second case costumed as hunters. The production may not have fared
well with the audience, for the work was soon replaced (see 1716/5).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 497; Groppo 501; Wiel 147; Alm 641

1716/5 Ottone' Music attributed to Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[OTTO]
A tragedia per musica (5) Text attributed to Girolamo Frigimelica-Roberti
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1716-02-08~
& Without dedicatee
oo A license to print the libretto for this abbreviated revival of 1694/2 was issued on 6 February 1715

(M.V.].2% The fact that a revival was given in this position suggests that the reception of // Germanico
(1716/4) was poor. Also, no cast list was included in the libretto for Ottone. After the conclusion of
the performance on 20 February Karl Albert, the Electoral Prince of Bavaria, gave a sumptuous supper
in the theater, followed by a festa di bailo, in honor of his four official hosts. On the last night of
Carnival (25 February in 1716), a particularly lavish dinner and a spectacular festa di ballo were given
in the theater jointly by the electoral princes of Bavaria and Saxony (A, CO, NV).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 498; Groppo 502; Wiel 146; Alm 642

 171l6a Serenata (untitled) for Karl Albert. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

 1716b Fede, Valore, Gloria, e Fama. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

 1716c Tl Solimano. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

1716/6 La costanza combattuta in amore Music by Giovanni Porta?
[CONSTANCY OPPOSED IN LOVE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani

rd Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1716-10-17

2 Barziza seems to have adopted the historical outline from Corradi's libretto for Germanico sul Reno (1676). However, Drusus was the father
of Germanicus. Tiberius plotted with Pisus to murder him.

293 A Ithough no dedicatee is named, this text (which dealt with Saxon history of the tenth century) was undoubtedly intended to flatter the
Electoral Prince of Saxony, who had been traveling for some time towards Venice and reached Padua on 9 February under the assumed name
of the Count of Lusazia (NV).

2 The title-page of the libretto is dated 1716.
5 A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1716, entry of 22 Febraro. The hosts were Zaccaria Canal, Almord Giustinian, Almore Grimani, and Almore Pisani.

26 Porta (c. 1675-1755) is believed to have been Venetian by birth and to have trained with Francesco Gasparini. After Gasparini's departure
for Rome, Porta took a post in Verona. La costanza initiated a twenty-year period of intense activity in Venice. In it Porta's attention was divided
between the theater and the Ospedale della Pieta. His unsuccessful competition with Lotti to become maestro di cappella at San Marco in
1736 led him to accept a position as Kapellmeister at the Bavarian court (1737), where he remained until his death.

328 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Dedicated to Antonio Ferdinando Gonzaga

TB

The text concerned Barsina (Elisabetta Denzio), the daughter of Artabanos, and her stature as the

second wife of Alexander the Great, whose original union was with Stateira (Anna Maria Giusti, La

Romanina). The action took place in Babylonia. The text had earlier been set under the title Amori

ministri della fortuna for a production in Milan in 1694. It was revived in Prague in 1728. Later progeny

included Galeazzi's II trionfo della costanza (1731/1) and Paganelli's Barsina (1742/7).

OR La costanza was first performed on 17 October 1716, the date of dedication of the libretto. (An earlier
license, of 7 October, for Le rivalita in amore [Suppl. 1] must represent an earlier version.). The
production continued through 26 November, when it was abruptly halted owing to the sudden death
of the 21-year-old Denzio.

A Arias in D-Dlb (prima); GB-BC (with sinfonia)

Listed as Bonlini 500; Groppo 504; Wiel 148; Alm 644, 645

1716/7 Arsilda, regina di Ponto Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[ARSILDA, THE QUEEN OF PONTOS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Domenico Lalli
Tr Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Grilletta e Fanfarone SORTING DATE: 1716-10-27
w Dedicated to Giacomo Brivio"

The royal twins Tamese and Lisea lost their father before Tamese was old enough for his voice to
have changed. As they grew into adulthood, each was courted by suitors from other nations. After
Tamese was falsely believed to be dead, Lisea, disguising herself as her brother, courted Arsilda, the
queen of Pontos. Lalli emphasized his conformance to the Aristotelian unities of place, time, and action
by devoting an entire page of the libretto to describing them as such. The place was Sicily, the time
was the annual day on which government figures took public oaths, and the actions (somewhat in contrast
to Aristotelian precepts) consisted of the intrigues to which false identities and infidelities lent themselves.

ice) Arsilda was first performed on 27 (A, NV) or 28 October 1716 (PV). It was still running on 21 November
(A). A license to print the libretto had been issued on 18 October 1716. Arsilda was revived in January
1717 after the failure of Penelope (1716/9).

OP -s9 Vivaldi was described in the libretto as the celebrated violin virtuoso.?'? According to Pallade veneta
(31 October), Arsilda was received with such applause that one foresees a great future for it.? Annibale
Pio and Anna Maria Fabbri took the roles of the twins, while Anna Vicenza Dotti made her Venetian
debut in the title role. Pietro Ramponi, son of the former ducal-chapel singer Gerolamo Ramponi, was

2' The duke of Guastalla, coming from a lateral branch of the Gonzaga family, had been born in 1687. He had not previously been a patron
of Venetian opera. By some accounts, he was quite melancholic.

208 Barsina's parentage varies from one libretto to the next. Historically, she was the daughter of Darius. The work is a historical conflation:
Artabanos (the last king of the Parthians) can only have been Artabanos V (212-224), but Alexander lived in the fourth century BC.

2 Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 173; Groppo MS, p. 179.

210 It appears that the cause of death was a seizure: Terminata Giovedi della scorsa la recita nel Teatro di San Moise, fu sorpresa da effetti
matricoli che li causorono la convulsione interna la Sig.ra Elisabetta Denzio, ch'era una delle recitanti, benche fosse nell'eta di 21 anni, non
hebbe rigore di resistere al male, onde la notte seguente fece la comparsa sulle scene orribili della morte (I-Vas, IS, Avvisi, Busta 713, Fasc.
Pallade veneta, entry for the week of 28 Novembre-5 Dicembre 1716, f. 2r).

2" The count of Brochles was the hereditary ruler of Montevecchia (Lecco).

?!? Although he was still in the employ of the Pieta, this change of description may reflect the rising esteem that Vivaldi enjoyed from the entourage
of Saxons who had arrived in Venice during the preceding spring.

23 6

...tale applauso che se gl'e prognosticata una grande fortuna (Pallade veneta, p. 296). The grande fortuna seems to have amounted
only to the reuse of the sinfonia in Vivaldi's Teuzzone (Mantua, 1718).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 329

the newly appointed impresario.?"* The scenery was by Bernardo Canal, with apparent contributions
by his brother, Cristoforo, and Bernardo's son Gio. Antonio (later known as Canaletto).?!

A Scores (2 versions) in I-Tn;?" arias and sinfonia in D-DIb (prima)

Listed as Bonlini 499; Groppo 503; Wiel 140; Alm 643; RV 700

 1716d Cantata for the Capture of Timosoar. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
 1716e L'empieta castigata nella caduta di Domitiano. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1716/8 Ariodante Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[ARIODANTE]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Salvi
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1716-11-14
&o Dedicated to Karl Philipp of Neuburg, Imperial Elector?!
i) In this text, ostensibly derived from Ariosto's Orlando furioso, the foreign knight Ariodante fell in

love with the Scottish princess Guinevere/Ginevra, but he was opposed by the scheming Polynexos,
duke of Albania.'* Guinevere was betrayed by her lady-in-waiting, Dalinda, who hoped to win Polynexos
for herself. The story was set in Edinburgh. Ariodante was first performed, with maximum applause,
on 14 November 1716 (A). A license to print the Venetian libretto had been issued on 5 November
1716. Venetian theaters were closed from 29 November for Advent in 1716. Ariodante reopened after
Christmas (CO), when it may have been attended by ten English lords and other foreign dignitaries.

Oe Faustina Bordoni made her operatic debut as Guinevere in this production."! Her appearance may have
been prompted by her recent success in the serenata Fede, Valore, Gloria, e Fama (Suppl. 5a). Bordoni
came to be known for her accuracy of pitch, unlabored facility at ornamentation, impressive musical
memory, plasticity of expression, fluidity of movement, and for her particular skill in conveying pathos.
It was noted in the libretto that the music was by the celebrated master Carlo Francesco Pollarolo.
Romoaldo Mauro is likely to have been the scenographer for this work, for he was given a box at San
Giovanni Grisostomo almost contemporaneously with the production.??

- Salvi's text had first been set (as Ginevra, principessa di Scozia) by Perti for Pratolino (September 1708)
but, as he noted in this libretto, the work had now been truncated and altered in numerous ways, and
the number of characters had been changed. These days in Italy, he said, anyone [can] change
anything, including the title ofa work, at will. Such changes did not dampen the enthusiasm of audiences.
The total work was revived as 1718/7. The text was also recycled by Sellitti (1733/5, as Ginevra) and

214 T_Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti A. Ciola, Busta 4028, item of 24 Ottobre 1716.

215 Canaletto (1697-1768) is believed to have spent both the 1716-17 and the 1717-18 seasons helping to paint scenery at both Sant' Angelo
and San Cassiano. He is likely also to have been engaged briefly in Vicenza for the same purpose.

216 Unpublished edition by Livia Pancino (c. 1991), who discusses the sources in Le opere, ii.

2! Karl Philipp had written to his cousin, Prince Ferdinando de' Medici, on 9 March 1710 (after the production of Agrippina had closed)
recommending Handel very highly, on the strength of his stage debut in Venice. It seems remotely possible that he could likewise have
recommended Faustina Bordoni, on the strength of her stage debut in Venice, to Handel.

218 Although the name Ariodante is retained by reason of its familiarity, the Anglicization, Hariodante, more clearly conveys the underlying
meaning of the name, which means soothsayer (from the roots haruspex and do).

21 Recent theories on the origins of Arthurian romance suggest that Guinevere (Fr.) was the White Goddess (Guanhumara) and Alba the White
Land between the rivers Tae and Don. The battles of Arthur occurred not in the eighth century (as suggested in this libretto) but in the sixth.

22 The English lords were first reported to be present on 2 January (A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1717).
?! She was already identified as a virtuosa in the service of the Elector Palatine, a title which she was to hold for many years to come.
222 Unpublished research by Gastone Vio.

3 In the case of the Florentine production, however, Ferdinand de' Medici had requested that some arias be changed to suit the breathing
requirements of Maria Domenica Pini (see R. L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, pp. 213f).

330 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

by Wagenseil (1745/8). Bertoni's setting was given at San Samuele (autumn 1753). An adaptation of

Salvi's text was made for Handel's like-named work (HWV 33; 1735). A lost Ginevra, principessa

di Scozia (credited to Vivaldi as RV 716) was given in Florence (1736). The text had further progeny

under several titles and inspired a host of new texts on the same general outline in the nineteenth century.
fi Score in D-B (Venice, 1718); US-WC; arias in A-Wn (Venice, 1716); GB-BC; US-Aut

Listed as Bonlini 501; Groppo 505; Wiel 144; Alm 646

1716/9 Penelope la casta" Music by Fortunato Chelleri
[PENELOPE THE CHASTE]
A dramma per musica Text by Matteo Noris
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1716-12-28
& Dedicated to Domenico Grillo, Nob. Gen.

This resetting of a text given with Pallavicino's music at San Giovanni Grisostomo (1685/4) to rave
reviews could not have met a more unlikely reception than that at Sant' Angelo in 1716. The revival
may have been intended to appeal to the many Saxons who spent the 1716-17 Carnival period in Venice,
but in contrast to the legendary performance of Margarita Salicola, recruited on its basis to the Saxon
court, that of Anna [Vicenza] Dotti (La Bombace) engendered prompt hostility.

8@ This second opera had opened by 28 December 1716 and was probably terminated on the 30th. A
license to print the libretto had been issued on the 7th. The work's poor reception was the subject of
asatirical poem. According toa report of 8 January 1716 M.V., the composer had been stabbed during
the preceding week as he was handing the Bombace to her boat. The report's author, Alexander
Cunningham, speculated that it was some of the [y*] Opera men in St. Angelo [who committed the
crime], because his Opera did not take, and was damned the 2d and 3d night.

 The performers were not paid in a timely manner, despite the requirement that deposits be made before
the production opened. Three singers  Angelo Zanoni (Ulisse), Lugrezio Borzari (Gildo), and Anna
Fabris (Ariene)  were ordered by an official of the Council of Ten on the 31st to continue in the
production, but it is not evident that there were further performances. A miscalculation in the number
of tickets issued for that performance is mentioned in a stragiudiziale brought against the composer.
Ramponi was ordered to return the originali to Chelleri on 5 January (1717), indicating that the production
had already ceased. A revival of Arsilda (1716/7) was in progress by 16 January (CO).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 502; Groppo 506; Wiel 141; Alm 647

ogy *
1717/1 La virti coronata Music attributed to Reinhard Keiser!
[VIRTUE CROWNED]
A dramma per musica Text adapted anonymously from Domenico David

24 Facs. edn. in DMV, xiii.

5 Following comments in the new libretto, Groppo (MS, p. 179) noted that the same text had given infinite pleasure in the 1685 production.
26 See Vio, Satira, passim.

7 GB-Lpro, SPV, Series 99, Box 61 (transcription kindly supplied by Elizabeth Gibson).

228 See I-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 42, Fasc. 1716, entries of 30 December 1715, 5 and 12 Gennaro 1716 [M.V.], and the Giudice de' Forestier,
Busta 6, entry of 15 Marzo 1717. The issues related to pay were not settled until the following July.

2 Cf. Mancini et al. (Teatri, i/2, pp. 38f) read this date as 2 Gennaio; no business was normally transacted on the first three days of January.
230 [-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 42, Fasc. 1716, item of 5 Genaro 1716 [M.V.].

23! The work is unattributed in Groppo, Wiel, and Alm. It is attributed by John Roberts to Keiser in NGDMM/2. Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 175)
calls attention to the earlier setting by C. F. Pollarolo. Keiser (1674-1739) had set La forza della virti, oder Die Macht der Tugend in 1700
(score in D-B; facs. in Handel Sources, ii, 1986). Between 1697 and 1703 Keiser (who had been educated at the Thomasschule in Leipzig)
composed for the Hamburg opera. He had developed a great love of Italian music.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 331

M1 Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1717-01-04~
a Dedicated to Honophrius Peyer?

This text, which had been set by C. F. Pollarolo as La forza della virti (1692/7), concerns Spanish,
Austrian, and French interrelations in the early medieval period. The work has been abridged and some
of the characters have been renamed; no cast list is given.

O@E A license to print the libretto was issued on 28 December 1716.2*? The production, which should have
opened almost immediately, was reported to be in progress on the 16 (CO) and on 28 January 1716.
Records of the Council of Ten gives some sense of the (dis)organization of San Moise. As the maestro
di musica and leader of the orchestra, Giovanni Porta was supposed to provide performing materials
(originali) every evening. As impresario, Giovanni (Zuane) Orsato was supposed to provide nightly
pay for the orchestra and lighting in the theater.** Nicola Tricarico, then officially employed in Mantua,
was ordered by the Council on 28 January to be prepared to sing every night at San Moise, as he was
contracted to do, and to learn the music for the work or appear before the tribunal the following morning
to explain why he could not.* Pietro Balbi was responsible for the box- and folding-chair rentals in
the theater.> Overall, the monies earned from the rental of boxes and chairs, the sale of tickets, and
other miscellaneous charges were to be put into an escrow account administered by a representative
elected by the musicians for the good of the creditors (scenery designers, tailors, et al.). The creditors
were to be recompensed only after the singers and instrumentalists had been paid.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 506; Groppo 510; Wiel 149; Alm 651, 652

1717/2 Alessandro Severo' Music by Antonio Lotti
[ALEXANDER SEVERUS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
ry Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1717-01-17
i) Dedicated to Charles Mordaunt, Earl of Peterborough'?

Alexander Severus became emperor of Rome [222-235] at the age of thirteen. He was the second of
two Syrians to ascend to this position (the first was his cousin, Elagabalus). His mother initially served
as his regent. His marriage to the patrician Sallustia was arranged a few years later. His genuine love
for his wife led to her appointment as empress, a title which alienated his mother.

282 Possibly Swiss (he came from Haslach, near Schaffhausen, on the Swiss-Swabian border), Peyer served as a colonel of the Venetian army.
Peyer could have attended the performance of works by Keiser, who in the 1710s wrote several occasional works for performance in various
parts of Swabia.

?3 The libretto was dedicated on 4 January 1716, which must be M.V., since the December date of the license to print the libretto was unambiguous
(the title-page is dated 1716).

254 Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 42, Fasc. 1716, order of 30 Gennaio 1716 [M.V.].
235 I_Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 42, Fasc. 1716, judgment of 28 Gennaio 1716 [M.V.].

236 |_Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 42, Fasc. 1716, order of 28 Gennaio 1716 [M.V.]. Tricarico's name does not appear in the cast list for any work
after La costanza combattuta in amore (autumn 1716).

7 Loe, cit., order of 30 Gennaio 1716 [M.V.].
8 Loc. cit., order of 19 Februaro 1715 [M.V.], signed by Antonio Fachi.

2 Lord Peterborough (1658-1735), noted for his short stature and frenetic activity, spent the carnivals of 1712, 1715, 1716, and 1717 in Venice.
He was regarded with suspicion by intelligence agents because he did not have any apparent reason to be there. In 1717 he remained in Venice
until almost the end of February (NV) and attended the May fair in Reggio Emilia. Peterborough had previously (from 1711) served as British
ambassador to the Empire. Zeno's dedication cites him as the commander of the (British) royal fleet. In September 1717 he was to be arrested
in Bologna under false charges of seeking to assassinate the exiled James III, who was in Urbino (Corp, Origin, p. 19). In 1722 he took as
his second wife the singer Anastasia (Mrs.) Robinson (1695-1755).

332 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA
 Alessandro severo was first performed on 17 January 1717 (A, CO), when it was found to be enjoyable

(PV).TM A license to print the libretto had been issued on 3 January 1716 [M.V.]; the title-page was
dated 1717. Francesco de Grandis sang in the title role, with Marianna Benti Bulgarelli (La Romanina;
here Giulia, the emperor's mother) and Diana Vico (Sallustia).

aad Lotti's was the first of many settings of Zeno's libretto on this subject. Saunders notes, however, that
this was also Lotti's last work for Venice before his three-year sojourn in Dresden as well as Zeno's
last libretto for Venice before becoming court poet in Vienna.*' Handel's pastiche of the same title
(AWV A13, 1738) was based on a 1723 revision of Zeno's text for a Milanese production. It included
some arias from his own earlier works. Mancini's setting of the same text was given in Rome in 1718.

fi Score in D-Dlb; arias in D-B; GB-BC
Listed as Bonlini 504; Groppo 508; Wiel 152; Alm 649

1717/3 L'incoronazione di Dario' Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[THE CORONATION OF Darius]
A dramma per musica Text by Adriano Morselli
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1717-01-23
& Dedicated to Antonio Ferdinando Gonzaga
-

Morselli's text on the great Persian king had been set as 1684/1 by Freschi. It was noted in the 1717
libretto that the arias and the characters were altered to suit the modern use of the theater. This account
highlights Darius's ascension, after defeating two other claimants, and his union with Stateira, the
daughter of his predecessor Cyrus. Apart from some differences in the order of entries, however, the
changes are more those of emphasis than of substance. Roles for Apollo and a peasant have been
eliminated and an oracle has been introduced.

 @E This third opera was first performed on 23 January 1717 (A, PV); the title-page is dated 1716. A
license to print the libretto was issued on 15 January 1716 for 1716 [M.V.]. Although the work opened
amidst lingering financial difficulties which had begun with Penelope la casa, Pallade veneta praised
its magnificence. Annibale Pio Fabbri sang in the title role, with Anna Dotti (Statira), Carlo Cristini
(Oronte), and Antonia Pellizzari (Arpago). Vivaldi was identified as a celebrated composer. The
scenery was by Bernardo Canal and his sons. Lodovico Madonis, who was head of the second violins
in the orchestra, was also a financier of the work. He complained to the Council of Ten about the
receipts for the third night.

A Score (aut.) in I-Tn (terza); aria in F-Pc;?* sinfonia in D-DIb
Listed as Bonlini 505; Groppo 509; Wiel 142; Alm 650; RV 719

> The date of 26 December 1716 given in the introduction to the facsimile apparently was assumed from the Carnival 1717 designation
of the libretto.

241 NGDMM/2.
2 Facs. edn. in DMV, xx.

8 The duke of Guastalla. While the duchy of Mantua had collapsed in 1708, it is a telling sign of patriotism that the work of a Mantuan writer
was still considered preferable nine years later.

44 Giazotto (Vivaldi, p. 127) claimed a 1718 revival, which cannot be documented.

*5 In the satirical poem published by Vio (op. cit.), the author said [in rhyme] that the Red Priest [Vivaldi] was preparing the third opera
but no one knows when he has enough money for dinner.

246 Quantz praised the skills of Giovanni Madonis (1725), who took a troupe of singers to Wroctaw in 1726, went to Paris to participate in
the Concerts Spirituelles in 1729, and was subsequently taken into the Violons du Roi. He was lured to St. Petersburg for an annual salary
of 3,000 ruples in 1731 (Fetis V, 89). Giuseppe Madonis, who was active as a composer in Paris at the end of eighteenth century, appears
to have been a descendant.

47 1.Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 42, Fasc. 1716, item of 25 Febraro 1716 [M.V.].

248 Detailed commentary on the sources can be found in Pancino, Le opere, i.

1717/4

rT

Ow

1717/5

m1

#
Qo

1717/6

rd

> The scenario for tl

250 Similarly in the th

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 333

Chi la fa Vaspetta Music attributed to Girolamo Polani
[HE WHO DOES IT EXPECT IT]

A dramma-comico in musica Text attributed to Francesco Passarini
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1717-01-25~
Without dedicatee

The basic five-character scheme generally used at San Fantin was in force here, with a Venetian artisan
and his daughter Eurilla, who was being pursued by both Mingone and the gondolier Nico. The final
scene was to resemble a Venetian neighborhood. This is the first known instance (outside intermezzi)
in which Venice itself was portrayed on the Venetian stage.

A license to print the libretto was issued on 25 January 1717. The work can have run only for a short
time, since L ambizione castigata (1707/5) opened on 6 February. The year is likely to be new-style
because two different productions are confirmed for the winter of 1718. Since the theater had been
inactive over the preceding two years, a work with roots in commedia dell'arte could have provided
a transitional path to new productions.

Anticipating Goldoni (who used the same title for a work of his), Eurilla, her father, and the gondolier
all sing their lines in Venetian dialect. In the earlier Neapolitan commedia called Chi la fa, l'aspetti,"
the heroine was Isabella, the pursuers Camillo and Filino. Among the eleven roles in Goldoni's later
work of the same title, there were two for merchants  one with a young daughter and the other with
a young son. The story was long known in Neapolitan commedia.**!

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 507; Groppo 511; Wiel 158; Alm 653

L'ambizione castigataTM Music anonymous
[AMBITION PUNISHED]

A comi-drama in musica Text attributed to Francesco Mazzari
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1717-02-06
Without dedicatee

The roles in this short work anticipated those of many intermezzi and early comic operas. They include
a widow who is in love with a mock prince, a chambermaid, a gondolier (barcariolo), and a general.
The work opens with the widow admiring her hair in a mirror. L ambizione was first performed on 6
February 1717, when it enjoyed slight applause (PV). Its run would have been short, for Lent began
on the 17th. Licenses to print the libretto had been issued on | and 3 January 1717, in the latter case
for 1716.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 503; Groppo 507; Wiel 157; Alm 648

Tieteberga Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[TEUTBERG]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Maria Lucchini
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1717-10-16

he commedia is reproduced in Cotticelli et al., Commedia, Il, 121 ff.

ree-act commedia, there were roles for Isabella's and Filino's fathers.

25! Cf, the scenario in Cotticelli et al., Commedia, pp. 105ff.

282 The work opened

with the title L wmor in principessa, which was changed after minor alterations to the text (Groppo MS, p. 180).

334 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

& Without dedicatee*

oo]) Lothar, a ninth-century king of Astrasia, wished to renounce his wife, Teutberg, in order to marry his
secret love, Waldred. Other amorous liaisons and political ambitions complicated the plot. All of the
actions occurred on the wedding anniversary of the royal couple. Tieteberga was first performed on
16 October 1717 (A, PV). The ideas of the poet and the composer were said to be equally
conspicuous, and we are told that they received grand applause.*** The composer was styled the
ever-celebrated don Antonio Vivaldi.

fi Arias in D-B; F-Pn; I-Tn; S-L?*>
Listed as Bonlini 508; Groppo 512; Wiel 156; Alm 654, 655

L'innocenza riconosciuta Music attributed to Carlo Fr. Pollarolo

[INNOCENCE RECOGNIZED]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Tomaso Malipiero
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1717-10-27
at Without dedicatee*

Ferdinand, the young, unscrupulous brother of Gertrude, the queen of Hungary, abducted Jolanta, her
lady-in-waiting. The king,* who was on a trip to Constantinople, avenged the wrong upon his return.

OO & L'innocenza was first performed on 27 October 1717 (A). The cast included Silvia Lodi (La
Spagnoletta; here Fernando), Anna Maria Giusti (Geltrude), Lorenzo Beretta (Ottone), and Anna
Guglielmina (Giolanta).'* The libretto calls attention to the display of the historical map of the world
made by the Jesuit priest Antonio Foresti. The scenery was otherwise by the Canals. Giovanni (Zuane)
Orsato, who had held the analogous post at San Moise in recent years, was the impresario in 1717-18.
L'innocenza had an anonymous revival in Graz in 1738.

A No musical sources known?
Listed as Bonlini 509; Groppo 513; Wiel 154; Alm 656

1717/8 L'Argippo Music by Giovanni Porta
[ARGyYpPos]
A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
1 Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1717-10-31
ai Dedicated to Antonio di Sangro!

?53 One of the attendees was the duke of Mar, who was sent to Venice on behalf of James III, the son of Mary of Modena and the exiled King
James II. James's court was in residence at Urbino and sought to recruit outstanding singers to appear there (Corp, Stuart Court, p. 356).

254 Pallade veneta, p. 308.
255 The duke of Mar sought to acquire a score of this work but it cannot be confirmed that he succeeded (Corp, /oc. cit.).
?56 The duke of Mar attended a performance of this work (Corp, Joc. cit.).

*57 Named Ottone in the plot, with a note that his real name was Andrew. The allusion is most likely to have been to Andrew III [1290-1301],
who was nicknamed the Venetian.

258 A young Venetian singer, Giovanna Scalfi, took the role of the army general Guido. Although members of the Scalfi family never attracted
much notice as singers in the Venetian theaters, Rosana Scalfi clandestinely became the wife of Benedetto Marcello. Since noblemen were
not permitted to marry outside their social class, the marriage, while recognized by the Church, was never recognized by the Republic.

> The duke of Mar sought to acquire a score of this work (Corp, Stuart Court, p. 356) for performance at the court-in-exile of James III
at Urbino, but it is not clear that his effort succeeded (Corp, Stuart Court, p. 356).

2 Porta is said in the libretto to have been a pupil of the incomparable Francesco Gasparini.

>! Duke of Torremaggiore (northwest of Foggia) and probably therefore a prince of San Severo (Puglia).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 335

Tissaphernes, the ruler of the East Indies, was the father of Zanaida, who was secretly married
to Silvero. Unaware of Zanaida's marriage, Argyppos, the king of Cingone, also courted her. Silvero
laid a plot to confuse Zanaida visually, but she distinguished him from Argyppos by his voice. Valentino
Urbani sang in the title role, with Diana Vico (Zanaida) and Gio. Battista Minelli (Si/vero).

&S L'Argippo was first performed on 31 October 1717 (A). The setting in Agra gave cause for the inclusion
of numerous richly worked curtains and tapestries in the sets. These were designed by Bernardo Canal
and his sons. A palm-lined walk through the jungle was featured in the opening scene. He had been
attached intermittently to Sant'Angelo since 1711, but concurrently with this commission he was
permitted a box at San Cassiano.

fi Score in D-DIb; arias in F-Pc
Listed as Bonlini 510; Groppo 514; Wiel 153; Alm 657

1717/9 Eumene Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[EUMENES]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Salvi
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1717-11-13
& Dedicated to Louis-Nicolas de Neufville*TM
aad

Eumenes, the king of Cyprus, under the assumed name Pheraspes/Feraspe, and Klearchos, the prince

of Corinth, under the assumed name Almerindo, joined forces to defeat the Cypriot tyrant Creon. The

text was based on a drama called La pazzia politica d'Eumene, which Salvi said he had adapted from

prose to verse suited for scenery and music. A work with the same title (text attributed to Apostolo

Zeno, music by Francesco Gasparini) had been given in Reggio Emilia in June 1714.2

oo Eumene opened on 13 November 1717 (A).*' A license to print the libretto had been issued (without
a specified day) in November 1717. The dedicatee was in Venice (en route to Florence) when the work
was performed and again in the later part of February 1718 (NV). The cast included Nicola Grimaldi
(Eumene),* Antonio Bernacchi (Clearco), Anton Francesco Carli (Creonte), and Faustina Bordoni
(the lady-in-waiting Berenice).

A Arias in F-Pc; I-Be

Listed as Bonlini 511; Groppo 515; Wiel 151; Alm 658

1717/10 II vinto trionfante del vincitore Music by Antonio Vivaldi and others
[THE CONQUERED TRIUMPHANT OVER THE CONQUEROR]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Marchi

1 Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1717-11-22~

28 Corresponding to what today is Pakistan.
26 This ruler was entirely mythical, as was his kingdom.

264 Identified as the marquis of Alincourt on the title-page of the libretto and Monsieur Villeroi in the dedication, Neufville and his family
(he was the son of the duke of Villeroy and nephew of the senior marquis d'Alincourt, a field-marshal) were noted in the early years of the
eighteenth century for the salon they convened in their home at Sousy (Memoires du President Henault, 2nd edn., with notes by Frangois Rousseau,
[Paris: Librairie Hachette, 1911], pp. 19f). From 1712 the marquis was governor of Lyon and its environs. Another attendee was the duke
of Mar [John Erskine], secretary to the exiled James III (Corp, Origin, p. 15).

265 Groppo MS, p. 182. An earlier opera scenica of the same name (1709) is listed in Suppl. 3a.
266 Fabbri and Verti, Due secoli, p. 53.
?67 Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 176.

268 The duke of Mar, scouting for singers for his court at Urbino, spoke to Grimaldi during an interval in one of the performances to arrange
for the music from Eumene to be sent to Urbino (there is no evidence that it survives). On 9 December he sent Grimaldi a formal letter inviting
him to Urbino as soon as his obligations in Venice were met (Corp, Stuart Court, p. 356).

336 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

& Dedicated to Marquis Alessandro Lomellini?

OO The text, dedicated on 22 November 1717, was a shortened version of Zenobia, regina de' Palmireni,
set by Albinoni as 1694/5. Marchi said he had revised it within a few days to suit modern taste. Anna
Maria Giusti, a defender of the impresario Giovanni Orsato in his numerous conflicts with unpaid
musicians, sang in the role of Zenobia.

A Score (Acts 1, 3) in I-Tn
Listed as Bonlini 512; Groppo 516; Wiel 155; Alm 659; RV Anh. 58

1717/11 Arsace' Music by Michel Angelo Gasparini
[ARSAKES]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Salvi
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo, a giuoco, and a trattenimento giocoso *" SORTING DATE: 1717-12-26~
wz Dedicated to Charles Douglas, Duke of Queensbury and Dover*

The hero of this work was only nominally related to the ancient Arsakids of Parthia, for the story was
a thinly veiled account of the Count (Ear!) of Essex, a lover of Elizabeth I who betrayed the queen for
one of her ladies-in-waiting and was eventually beheaded. The story had been transmitted over the past
century both in French drama and in Spanish and Neapolitan improvised comedies.?

ic) A license to print the libretto was issued on 12 December 1717, suggesting performance immediately
after Christmas; the title-page was dated 1718. The opening was anticipated in a letter of 24 December
1717 by Alexander Cunningham, who noted that the text was based on ye [the] Tragedie of ye Earle
of Essex under ye name of Arsace. Corneille's drama was credited in the libretto, while pleasing the
Ttalian theater was given as the reason for changing the venue from England to Persia. The textual
tradition eventually led to Donizetti's Roberto Devereux (1837).

 This production seems to have had only two performances in the first instance, but it had a brief revival
(not separately listed) after Astianatte (1719/1). Cunningham referred to its poor reception in a letter
of 18 February 1718, in which he reported that this town is much devided in their judgement about
ye last Opera at St. Giovanni Chrysostomo...tis condemned without being heard ye third time, and
most of ye Compagnie has left that house; alsoe Sigr. Nicolini [ = Nicola Grimaldi] with several other
actors are ingadgeing [engaging] themselves for the next year to sing at Naples, if the Spaniards doe
not disturb them.?

26 4 nobleman from Genoa. The surname Lomellini is well-known to music historians because the composer Alessandro Stradella (b. 1642)
was stabbed to death in Genoa in 1682 for his alleged love affair with Maria Caterina Lomellini, the wife of Gio. Maria Garibaldi. The surname
also belonged to the Genovese Grand Prior (1685-92) of the Order of Malta in Venice (Fra Stefano Lomellini).

27 Orsato was defended by another Roman singer, Maria Maddalena Tibaldi, in November 1717 (Gastone Vio, unpublished research).In one
of his dealings of the same period, he promised the composer Giovanni Vandi 50 ducats for the score of L odio abbattuto dalla costanza, which
he expected to produce at Sant' Angelo. It appears that Orsato was reluctant to stage works (including this one) which did not have a dedicatee.
Giusti later performed with traveling troupes, including that of Antonio Denzio (Prague, 1724-35).

21! Although San Giovanni Grisostomo prided itself on not providing comic intermezzi, this trattenimento giocoso di familiari di corte appears
to have used the pretense of representing court jesters in a play-within-a-play.

2? The duke of Queensbury, who was traveling with Lord Peterborough, remained in Venice until 4 March. He was to become a director of
the Royal Academy of Music, London, in 1728 (Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 31).

273 See, for example, Elena Liverani, El Conde de Sex nella rilettura seicentesca dei comici dell'arte italiani in Due saggi sul teatro spagnolo
nell Italia del seicento (Rome: Bulzoni, 1993), 11-54; Strohm, The Earl of Essex: Servitore di due padroni, in Dramma per musica, 294-305;
the scenario in Cotticelli et al., Commedia, 473ff.

24 In Corneille's Le Comte d'Essex (1678), which served as Salvi's model, Stateira (representing Queen Elizabeth) was rumored to have had
a love affair with Robert Devereux, the count of Essex. Strohm, Dramma, p. 305, also defines the differences of intellectual context in Britten's
Gloriana (1943).

2751 etter from Alexander Cunningham to Joseph Addison (GB-Lpro, SPV, Series 99, Box 62, f. 22). Grimaldi sang in the title role with Marianna
Benti Bulgarelli as the widow Stateira. Cunningham (c. 1655-1730) was a classicist from Ayreshire who served as a tutor to the son of the
first duke of Queensbury. He later edited the works of Horace, Virgil, and other authors of antiquity. He served as minister to Venice for the

1717/12

1718/1

im

Op,

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 337

Despite such reactions, the text for Arsace was all but immortal: it was in use through 1768 and variant
versions survived until 1789 (e.g., at San Benedetto). Gasparini's music had a long lifetime as well,
for it was in use through 1733. Further settings were made by Giacomelli, Lampugnani, and Feo. The
best known alternative version based on Salvi's text was by Orlandini (with arias by Amadei). Called
Amore e Maesta, it was first performed at the Cocomero (Florence, summer 1715) and revived by Paolo
Rolli (London, 1721).? Airs from Orlandini's setting were published in England in the same year,
and the full work (with various revisions) was given at least six times between 1725 and 1739 in London,
Hamburg, and various venues in northern Italy.

Arias in I-Be (for 1718 [M.V.])
Listed as Bonlini 513; Groppo 517; Wiel 162; Alm 660, 661

Meleagr oO Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[MELEAGER]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Pietro Antonio Bernardoni?
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1717-12-27~

Without dedicatee

In Greek mythology Meleager, the king of Caledonia, was a champion boar-hunter who wished to court
the huntress Atalanta. Since Atalanta, the queen of Arcadia, had said she would only marry someone
who could beat her in a contest, he gave her a boar-hide as a sign of his love. Ovid's tale as presented
here enables Meleager (Domenico Tollini) to marry the princess Elisa (Camilla Zoboli) so that Atalanta
(Teresa Muzzi) can wed the prince with whom she was originally in love.

It can be deduced from the overall pattern of activities at Sant' Angelo that Meleagro should have opened
onor about 27 December 1717. The title-page is dated 1718. The text had first been set by Marc' Antonio
Ziani for performance at the Viennese court in August 1706.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 517; Groppo 521; Wiel 164; Alm 665

Bertoldo' Music attributed to Giovanni Battista Bassani*
[BERTHOLD]

A dramma tragicomico Text attributed to Francesco Passarini
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1718-01-11~

Without dedicatee

This short tragicomedia featured Albuin, the king of the Lombards, and three other members of his
court plus Berthold, a villain well-known from children's stories (see 1749/1). The setting was Verona.
A license to print the libretto was issued on 24 December 1717; the title-page was dated 1717. Bertoldo
is likely to have opened by the time Carnival began (11 January).

last five years of his life. On the revival, see Groppo MS, p. 182.

276 Strohm devotes a whole chapter to this work and its reincarnations in Dramma per musica, 177-198.
277 See W. Kirkendale, Court Musicians, p. 485.

278 Bernardoni (1672-1714) was closely associated with Lodovico Muratori in Modena and the Arcadians in Rome. He had succeeded Minato
as court poet at the Viennese court in 1701. He therefore may have been the author of La caccia in Etolia (another title for the same story;
Modena, 1716) in which Elisabetta Denzio took the role of Atalanta.

27 The absence of any music, the uncertainty of the attributions, and the presence of an English patron (1717/11) all suggest that although
this work is not considered to have been known to Handel when he composed his Atalanta (HWV 35) in 1736, the matter might merit investigation.
Handel's source is said to have been Belisario Valeriani (1715). See also La felicita d'imenei dal destino (1697) and Chelleri's La caccia in
Etolia (1725), both in Suppl. 5a.

26 The composer had died in the autumn of 1716.

338

1718/2

mM

2)
CO

1718/3

OOE

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 514; Groppo 518; Wiel 159; Alm 662

Farnace Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[PHARNAKES]

A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1718-01-11~

Dedicated to Wilhelm Friedrich (Prince), Margrave of Brandenburg!

As in Morari's text on the same subject (1703/9), history and mythology are entangled in this work.
Some of the names have been changed. Cunningham indicates that this work was running on 14 January
1718 (a Friday) and implies that it may have opened the preceding Monday or Tuesday.*? Tuesday,
the 11th, is likely to be correct, since it was the opening day of Carnival. The cast included Gaetano
Borghi in the role of Pakoros, king of the Parthians, with Diana Vico as his second wife, Stateira.*
This is the first libretto to give credit to the choreographer  Susanna Dentis, who was to be a mainstay
of the profession. The composer was honored with his own box on account of his being a celebrated
maestro.** Although Lalli's text was set again by Leo (Naples, 1736), it was A. M. Lucchini's account
which found a broad reception all over Europe in the last quarter of the eighteenth century.*

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 516; Groppo 520; Wiel 170; Alm 664

Cleomene Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[CLEOMENES]

A dramma per musica Text by Vincenzo Cassani
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Alcea e Gillo,** balli, and a combattimento SORTING DATE: 1718-01-22

Dedicated to the patrons of the theater

Before his death Otaros, the childless king of Corinth, instructed his wife, Theodelinda, that after a
year of widowhood she should marry the most valorous prince of the realm. Cleomenes, the prince
of Macedonia, who was to help in the quest, declared himself to be in love with her.

Performance of Cleomene was authorized by the Council of Ten on 22 January 1718. A request to open
on the 20th had been denied.*' Teresa Muzzi took the role of Theodelinda, with Domenico Tollini as
Cleomenes. Because the production was closely monitored by the Council of Ten, highly informative
payment records exist. They show that by way of instrumental resources, the production involved two
cembali, twelve string players, and an oboist (Domenico Mahaeni). The three most highly paid string
players  Paolo Sabadin (principal violinist), Giovan Pettinati (violone), and Carlo Bianchi (violoncello)
 were brought in from outside the Veneto. So too was the viola-player Antonio Meani. One of the

28! Margrave Wilhelm Friedrich (1686-1723) was from the Ansbach line of the family.
28 etter from Alexander Cunningham to Joseph Addison (GB-Lpro, SPV, Series 99, Box 62, f. 8.)
283 Although Bolognese, Borghi enjoyed the protection of Gian Gastone de' Medici for ten years (1711-22).

28 Unpublished research by Gastone Vio. Thereafter the theater regularly offered boxes to composers including Antonio Pollarolo (1719),
Orlandini and Buini (1720).

285 See Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 428.
286 Cited in Groppo MS, p. 184.

287 GB-Lpro, SPV, Series 99, Box 62, f. 10; letter of 21 January 1718 from Alexander Cunningham to Joseph Addison (document kindly supplied
by Elizabeth Gibson).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 339

locals played a small theorbo (siorbina),** and seven played bowed strings. Domenico Magini was

engaged to tune the harpsichords and to manage the other instruments.* Giovanni Gallo was engaged
to provide the balli and combattimento (which are not mentioned in the libretto).?
Performances given on 22, 23, and 25 January, which are documented in detail, were not well received.
Folding-chair rentals totaled 109 for the first night; ticket sales are curiously absent from the report.
For the second performance 214 tickets were sold and 36 scagni were rented. By the third performance
only 49 tickets were sold and 5 scagni rented. It appears that the production was then terminated.!
Albinoni is not named as the composer in the libretto, but he is identified in payment records, which
also indicate that he conducted the orchestra. As maestro di musica Albinoni was paid 186 lire, a
sum which represented 30 zecchini for the opening night and 13 zecchini for each subsequent
performance.

&S Bernardo Canal was paid 15 zecchini for the scenery used on the opening night and 5 zecchini for each
subsequent night, for a total of 80 zecchini. This suggests a total of fourteen performances in all, while
Albinoni's pay indicates a total of thirteen. Canal seems also to have been responsible for lighting the
inside of the theater and operating the machinery, for which he was paid separately.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 519; Groppo 523; Wiel 165; Alm 667

1718/4 La virti tra nemici Music attributed to Giuseppe Boniventi'
[VIRTUE AMONG ENEMIES]

A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Battista Abbati?*

ml Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1718-01-24~

Dedicated to Francesco Bembo*

The plot did not follow a particular historical script. The widow Amages was content to lead a reclusive
life in Sarmaria when her king (Olderic) was attacked by Scythians. Her captain and emissary (Ormontes)
was unable to negotiate a peace. The invader set his amorous sights on Ormontes' daughter Berenice,
but she was eventually married to her first love, Silvio. The cast included Francesco Braganti (Olderico),
Costanza Maccari (Amage), Rosa Venturini (Berenice), and Antonia Merighi (Silvio).

 La virti, ostensibly given in the winter of 1718, is a difficult work to date precisely. A number of Venetian
battleships, returning from Corfu and its environs, arrived at the Lazzaretto for quarantine on Christmas
and the early days of 1717 (BG). The occupants would have been released in the later half of January.
Although Carnival officially opened on the 11th, the onset of heavy snows around the 20th, followed
by exceptional cold, froze the waters and led to a food shortage which continued a month (NV). By
the time the situation eased, few revelers remained. The remainder of the season was thus impaired.

288 Possibly a mandolin, although there is little documentation for its use in Venice at this time.

2 The local instrumentalists were Antonio Madonis, Marco [no surname], Gioseppe Rossi, Antonio Cabiato [ = Gabbiato], Giacomo Urato,
Antonio Ganassetti, and Gio. Battista Recaldini. The theorbinist was simply called Pietro.

> The nightly cost of hiring Gallo and his forces was 55:12 lire; the orchestra forestiera cost 54 lire a night (including lodging expenses);
the remaining instrumentalists were paid 54:10 lire. The cembalists received 20:18 lire.

>*! When read together, the entries are somewhat ambiguous, however. There are several references to expenses on 19 January as well as income
from 50 scagni (entered on the books for the 22nd). A shoemaker (Giacomo Mazzoni) was paid for the rental of boots and shoes for the first
performance and for four subsequent nights; a tailor (Zuane Canicani) was paid an amount suggesting that eight performances were given.
In all probability, an opening was anticipated for the 19th before objections were raised by the Council of Ten.

2? 1_Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 42, Fasc. 1717, items of 22 Gennaro 1717 [M.V.].

? Boniventi, who had worked in Karlsruhe and Mantua, seems to have provided some kind of link between Vivaldi, the Mantuan court, and
the theaters of Sant' Angelo and San Moise.

2 According to Groppo (MS, p. 183), Abbati had previously written the drama Domiziano, which was not set to music.

?5 Characterized in the libretto as a Venetian Archimedes, Bembo, a Venetian noble, was the captain of the battleship Leon trionfante.

340 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

fi No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 515; Groppo 519; Wiel 167; Alm 663

1718/5 Il vecchio deluso' Music anonymous
[THE OLD MAN WHO WAS DELUDED]
A dramma comico Text attributed to Francesco Passarini
im Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1718-02-16~
& Without dedicatee
 This was a bizarre tale, intended to include incorrect elocution. Elements of other recent works

at San Fantin seem to have been woven into it. It included roles for the young Florinda, courted by the
boatman Nico, for Florinda's friend Silvia, for an old man (Balilo), and for a bizarre youth (Aurindo).?
It was unrelated to the intermezzi (Fiammetta e Pancrazio; Suppl. 4a) sometimes called by the same
title. A license to print the libretto was issued on 16 February 1717 [M.V.]. The title-page is dated 1718.
Although the work had only two weeks in which to run, a contingent of French travelers from the House
of Bourbon arrived only on the 24th to enjoy the rest of Carnival.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 523; Groppo 527; Wiel 169; Alm 671

1718/6 Antigona' Music by Giuseppe Orlandini?*
[ANTIGONE]
A tragedia da cantarsi (5) Text attributed to Benedetto Pasqualigo'
im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Serpilla e Bacocco and balli SORTING DATE: 1718-02-13
& Dedicated to G. A. G3

In this account of Sophocles' tragedy, Antigone (the only surviving offspring of Oedipus) had a daughter,
Jocasta, by Osmenes, the son of her tyrannical husband Creon. Here Jocasta is believed to be the daughter
of the shepherd Ormindo.

oo Antigona was first performed on 13 February 1718 (A). It was the last work to be given at San Cassiano
until November 1724. Diana Vico sang in the title role, with Antonia Cavazzi (Giocasta), Gaetano Borghi
(Creonte), Valentino Urbani (Osmene), and Antinoro Claudi (Ormindo). The tragedy was conceived
in a grand style and presented as such. Antigone was described as ferocious and vindictive, Creon
as politically motivated and cruel, and Osmenes as pious and faithful. Susanna Dentis was the
choreographer. The libretto was obviously intended to be read, for each act is introduced by an eight-line
stanza. A concert performance is implied.

A Score (Bologna, 1727): GB-Lbl; excerpts (Venice): US-Csf (terza**')
Listed as Bonlini 521; Groppo 525; Wiel 171; Alm 669

2% According to the foreword, this text was following in the footsteps of Bertoldo. At the time the word bizarre could be complimentary.
97 A-Wn, CO, Vol. 1718, entry of 26 Febraro.

?8 Maestro di cappella of the Florentine court.

> Antigona was the subject of a tragedy by Luigi Alamanni in 1523 (cf. Riccoboni, Histoire, f. 108).

30 Pasqualigo's first libretto for the Venetian stage contains a dedicatory sonnet and an eight-line verse before each act. Similar flourishes
came to mark his style.

3 In the winter of 1718-9 this could not have been the third work at San Cassiano. Thus the pieces in this source must actually be from a later
run or the designation is in error.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 341

ILLUSTRATION 16. The first ballo from Orlandini's Antigona (1718/6): (a, upper example) first strain, to be repeated until
Truffaldina has finished the song. The second strain (b, lower example) consists of many iterations [some elided] of an bass
associated with the Aria del Granduca. As someone who worked mainly in Florence, Orlandini would have had many uses for
this foundation. It was not yet common for opera balli to circulate independently from scores. (US-Csf, M2.5 v. 66. Used by

permission.)

1718/7

Armida al campo d'Egitto Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[ARMIDE IN THE CAMP OF THE EGYPTIANS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Palazzi'
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1718-02-15

Dedicated to Friedrich Hieronymus, Baron of Witzendorff

This libretto, derived from Tasso's account of the First Crusade, had been set twice previously. The
setting was Gaza. A license to print the libretto was issued on the dedication date, 12 January 1718
[M.V.]. Armida was first performed on 15 February 1718 (A), a week before Shrove Tuesday. The
cast included Annibale Imperatori as Caliph, king of Egypt, with Antonia Merighi (Armida), Costanza
Maccari (Adrasto), and Chiara Orlandi (another Mantoanina) as Erminia.

Both Armida's opening and its spring run (RV 699b) were cited in the Gazzetta di Mantova of 29 April
1718, at which time its Mantuan performance' was expected to continue through May. It was revived
in Vicenza (as Gli inganni per vendetta, 1720; RV 720/699c), Ravenna (1726), and Venice (Santa
Margherita, 1731/4; Sant' Angelo, 1738/4). The sinfonia was reused in Vivaldi's Ercole sul Termodonte
(Rome, 1723).

' This Venetian librettist (fl. 1719-34) was soon to be satirized in Benedetto Marcello's // teatro alla moda (1720). He collaborated again with
Vivaldi on La verita in cimento (1720/7).

? Probably from Hanover or Miinster, although the name was prevalent in several parts of Germany.

> Gio. Battista Feriozzi's avviso dated 19 Febraro 1718 (f. lv) reads, E gionto qua il Serenissimo di Guastalla per godere il divertimento del
Carnevale, et essendosi mutato nel teatro 4 San Cassano il dramma in musica, vi ando lunedi sera per la prima volta quello intitolato L 'Antigona,
et in quello 4 San Moise vi ando martedi sera per la prima volta l'altro intitolato Armida in Campo d'Eggitto. The description of the activities
of the duke of Guastalla resembles those of a year later. Preceding material gives an account of recent naval affairs in the Adriatic which likens
the coverage to that of BO for the same week.

* Sartori 2762. Four roles were recast in the Venetian production.

342 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

fi Score (Acts 1, 3) in I-Tn (inverno 1718); arias in D-B, SWI; GB-Lbl; S-L*
Listed as Bonlini 522; Groppo 526; Wiel 168; Alm 670; RV 699a
 1718a Il trionfo di Cesare in Egitto. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1718/8 L'amor di figlia Music by Giovanni Porta
[THE MOTHER WHO WAS SUSTAINED BY HER DAUGHTER]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Gio. Andrea Moniglia by Domenico Lalli*
ry Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Lisetta e Delfo *TM SORTING DATE: 1718-10-29
& Dedicated to Antonio Rambaldo*

This not too serious, not too comic, but rather galant story is derived from Boccaccio. Lalli considered
it appropriate for the annual opening of Sant' Angelo and the autumn season. It is based

on the story of a Roman noblewoman who, although held in prison without food, was sustained by the
milk of her daughter, Sabina. The extraneous episodes woven into this story, including that of the jealous
husband, Martius, who disguised himself as Sabina's sister in order to accompany her on her visits
to the prison, were created by Lalli.

OO ww L'amor di figlia was first performed on 29 October 1718 (A, NV). Margarita Caterina Zani sang as
the devoted daughter. Vittoria Tesi made her Venetian debut in the unusual role of Claudio, who fell
in love with Marzia, the female impersonated by Marzio.** Another voice new to Venice was that
of Pietro Paolo Laurenti, a cellist, composer, and prince of the Accademia Filarmonica in Bologna.
The scenography was by Marco Ricci. As it was his first theatrical commission, he was offered a
box in the theater

Ai Arias in D-SWI; I-Vce
1718/9 Ariodante Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo

[ARIODANTE]
A dramma per musica (5)" Text by Antonio Salvi

im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1718-11-20

& Without dedicatee

Oo This five-act version of 1716/8 opened on 20 November 1718 (A). Salvi said in the libretto that he did

not alter the work to improve it but simply to adapt it to current needs. From a political perspective,
it may have been intended to highlight the recent return of Carlo Ruzzini from the peace negotiations

5 The sources are described and compared in Pancino, Le opere, ii.
*% Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 180) says the work had previously been given elsewhere under the title La Pieta di Sabina.
 This is the earliest documented performance in comic intermezzi in Venice by the celebrated team of Rosa Ongarelli and Antonio Ristorini.

5 Count of Collalto. Antonio Rambaldo (1681-1740) enjoyed an active diplomatic career in Vienna and Prague. He was a patron of Apostolo
Zeno and Ludovico Antonio Muratori. Some of the family's hereditary lands were near Treviso. Rambaldo's father had been a procurator
a few years earlier. The family had a box at Sant' Angelo.

3% According to the 1753 report of the Florentine musician Niccold Susier, Tesi (La Moretta) was the daughter of a Florentine servant (il
Moretto) of the famous castrato Francesco de Castris. She was first trained to be a ballerina, then a musician. She was also an accomplished
comica. After the death of Grand Prince Ferdinand in 1713, Moretto and his daughter went first to Bologna, then to Poland, where King August
II reportedly fell in love with her and bestowed great riches upon her. She later returned to Bologna, where she fell in love with a barber, but
then moved to Florence, where she was treated like a princess. At the time of this account she was living in Vienna and keeping company
with a wealthy Hungarian prince (Susier's account is transcribed in Italian in Kirkendale, Court Musicians, pp. 445f.).

> Tesi and Laurenti (1675-1719) were both at this time under the protection of Prince Antonio of Parma.
3 Moretti, Documenti, p. 111.
3 Unpublished research by Gastone Vio.

3 The 1716 version was in three acts.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 343

in Passarowitz. (The 1716 version had been an inadvertent prelude to the vigorous defense of Corfu.)
Faustina Bordoni retained the role of Guinevere/Ginevra, with Francesca Cuzzoni, in her Venetian debut,
as Dalinda, and Gio. Francesco Costanzi as Donald. Bartolomeo Bartoli sang in the title role.*"

A Score in D-B (1718); score fragments in A-Wn (1716)
Listed as Bonlini 525; Groppo 529; Wiel 160; Alm 673

1718/10 Il Lamano' Music by Michel Angelo Gasparini
[LAMAN]
A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1718-12-26
sy Dedicated to Francesco Corafan*'
Oo Il Lamano was a work involving a chain of mistaken identities assumed during a conflict over rights

of succession to the throne of ancient Syria. Young Laman, the rightful heir, was protected through
disguise from the wicked tyrant Hoteros/Otero.>! Bartolomeo Bartoli sang in the title role, with Faustina
Bordoni as his sister (A/tile), Antonio Bernacchi (Otero), and Francesca Cuzzoni as Oteros's sister
(Tamira). Il Lamano opened on 26 December 1718 (A, NV). A license to print the libretto had been
issued on 17 December 1718 for 1719; the title-page is dated 1719. The run cannot have lasted long,
because two other works were each performed for two nights prior to the opening of Jfigenia (1719/3)

less than four weeks later. Lalli's text was reset for performance in Munich (1726) by Geronimo Tonini.?"*
A Aria in D-SWI
Listed as Bonlini 526; Groppo 530; Wiel 173; Alm 674, 675
1718/11 Amalasunta' Music by Fortunato Chelleri
[AMALASUNTA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giacomo Gabrieli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With Serpilla e Bacocco; Madama Dulcinea e il Cuoco* SORTING DATE: 1718-12-27
i) Dedicated to Johann Mattheus, Count of Schulenburg*'

Amalasunta, the daughter of the sixth-century Ostrogothic ruler Theodoric, was not permitted to assume
the throne because of her gender. To produce an heir, she was forced to marry her cousin Theodatus.
In this account Amalasunta was deeply in love with Theodatus, who was pursued by Doriclea but married
Amalasunta in order to gain the Ostrogothic throne in Italy.

OO & Although anticipated for the winter of 1716 [see 1716/1], Amalasunta was first performed on 27

December 1718 (A, NV). A license to print the libretto had been issued on 17 December 1718 for 1719.
The libretto was dedicated on 24 December 1718; the title-page was dated 1719. Margarita Catterina
Zani took the lead role, with Antonia Merighi as Doriclea, Vittoria Tesi as Doriclea's brother Clodesillus,
and Giammaria Morosi as Theodatus. The scenography was probably by Marco Ricci.

3'5 Cuzzoni, from Parma, was in the service of Princess Violante Beatrice at Florence from 1717 until 1722, when she went to London.

3!6 | alli's libretto says that Corafan was from a noble Neapolitan family. However, his brother Giorgio was the prince of the Accademia degli

Erranti in Brescia, while he himself was involved with the Collegio in Parma.

317 The 1718-19 season was the last in which libretti regularly contained descriptive incisions on the frontispiece. San Giovanni Grisostomo

had been particularly habituated to their use, so the decline is most noticeable in its repertory.

3'8 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 694.

3! Wiel's indication (Teatri, p. 55) that the second was performed, although unconfirmed by Groppo or Bonlini, is borne out elsewhere (e.g.,

in W. Kirkendale, Court Musicians, p. 528).

30 The German field-marshal Schulenburg was particularly revered by the Venetians for his victory at Corfu (1716). His sister, Ehrengard
Melusine (1667-1743), was the mistress of George I at the time of his ascension to the British throne (1710) and eventually acquired the titles
of duchess of Kendall and baroness of Glastonbury.

344 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

 The score for Amalasunta, regina de' goti was completed by 2 December 1715 for performance early
in 1716 (see 1716/1). Stefano Lodovici, the impresario, then proposed that Chelleri change the part
of Doriclea to the contralto range to suit Costanza Maccari and that of Leuderius to soprano for
Margherita Gualandi. Chelleri said he would make the changes only if he were paid another 50 ducats.
Lodovici refused the supplement. Luigi Riccoboni and Michiel Angelo Peruccini testified on Chelleri's
behalf.>"' As performed in 1718/11 these two roles were taken by Antonia Merighi and Giuliano Albertini.

fi Arias in I-Vc
Listed as Bonlini 527; Groppo 531; Wiel 177; Alm 676

1719/1 Astianatte' Music by Antonio Maria Bononcini*"*
[ASTYANAX]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Salvi?!
1 Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1719-01-04~
& Dedicated to Rodrigo Annes de Saa*'

In Greek mythology Astyanax, the son of Hector and Andromache, was marked for death as a child.
Mythological accounts vary as to his ultimate fate. In this account, based on Racine's Andromaque,
he was saved by Pyrrhos, who was then wounded by Orestes.

o A license to print the libretto was issued on 17 December 1718. The production would have had to open
after J] Lamano (1718/8) closed, thus early in January. Despite the appearance of Marianna Benti
Bulgarelli (Andromaca) and Nicola Grimaldi (Pirro), Astianatte's run lasted for only two nights, after
which two performances of Arsace (1717/11) were given.*! Ifigenia (1719/3) opened on 21 January
1719. All theatrical works in progress at around 3 a.m. [O.V.] on 7 January were suspended because
of an earthquake. According to one report, it lasted the length of a Credo and caused audiences and
performers alike to exit the theaters.

- A commedia on Salvi's text, with arias by P. A. Bernardoni, had been given at Pratolino (September
1701). The text was set by an undetermined composer for performance at the Cocomero (Florence)
on 17 June 1716.> The performance of Giovanni Bononcini's better known work of the same name,
ona text by Haym (London: King's Theatre, 1727), provided the occasion for a celebrated stage fight
between Francesca Cuzzoni and Faustina Bordoni.>*4

Ai Arias in D-W*

Listed as Bonlini 520; Groppo 524; Wiel 161; Alm 668

3!7 ].Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti G. Bellan, Busta 1917, item of 3 Gennaro 1715 M.V.

3!8 The younger brother of Giovanni Bononcini, Antonio Maria (1677-1726) was greatly admired by the emperor Joseph I but set adrift by
his death in 1708. He returned to his native Modena and in 1721 became the maestro di cappella of its court.

3!9 Astyanax was also the subject of a tragedy by Buongiovanni Grattarolo in the late sixteenth century (cf. Riccoboni, Histoire, p. 104).
> Portuguese ambassador to the Papal court.
>! Groppo MS, pp. 182, 510.

32 BG issue of 17 Gennaro 1719, p. 4, report from Venice of 14 Gennaro: Verso le 3 ore e mezza di sabbato sera si senti...una terribil scossa
di terremoto, che dure lo spazio d'un Credo... pit: d'ogni altro luogo si senti alli teatri dell' opere, e comedie, da quali fuggirono le persone,
li comici bassarono subito il telone.... The same report appears in I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 169, f. 23, 14 Gennaro, and in CO, same date, but with
the time reckoned as 4 ore.

*3.R.L. and N. Weaver, Florentine Theater, pp. 190, 229. Strohm (Opernarien, ii, 151) also casts doubt on Bononcini's authorship of the
music for the Florentine productions of 1701 and 1716. He notes that Torri composed the works given in Munich in 1716 and 1717.

34 But see Lowell Lindgren, Astianatte, GO (i, 232), who maintains that the disruptions to the London performances were more akin to
a noisy war between the supporters of the respective singers.

5 According to Corp (Stuart Court, p. 356), the duke of Mar wrote on | January and 11 March 1718 of his having acquired a score of this
work. Lindgren points out that it is unclear whether Mar's 1718 was old- or new-style. It is possible that the duke's acquisition was made
through Astianatte's dedicatee or even through Domenico Scarlatti, who arrived in Lisbon, perhaps by way of England, on 29 November 1719
(op. cit., p. 360). In London, Bononcini was praised by supporters of the Stuarts, while Handel was favored by the Hanoverians.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 345

1719/2 Artabano, re de' Parti' Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[ARTABANOS, KING OF THE PARTHIANS]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Marchi
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1719-01-12~
& Dedicated to Pietro Emanuele Martinengo Colleone 
 This text, a reworking of 1716/3, required revision in order to gain the approval of the Riformatori dello

Studio di Padova on 5 January 1718 [M.V.].2 The title-page is dated 1718. Although Vivaldi's presence
in Venice at this time has been disputed, the records of the papal legate confirm that Vivaldi's patron,
Antonio Guastalla, and part of his court were in Venice from 14 January until c. 25 February 1719.7
A principal motive would have been discussion of the forthcoming marriage of Philip, the hereditary
count of Hesse-Darmstadt, to the princess Eleonora Gonzaga of Guastalla. Vivaldi's Tito Manlio (RV
738), given during the same season in Mantua, was dedicated to the betrothed couple.

Oo Marchi wrote in a note to the reader that the musical virtues of Signor D. Antonio Vivaldi, which had
previously awaited complete admiration, can now significantly engage your attention in applauding
it, for new ideas have adorned [this work]. The cast included Francesco Natali (Il Perugino) as
Artabanos, with Costanza Maccari (Tigrane) and Antonia Merighi (Doriclea).* Most of the arias from
Artabano are present in the pastiche Die iiber Hass und Liebe siegende Bestindigkeit, oder Tigranes,
Kenig von Armenien (RV Anh. 57), given at the Gansemarkt [Goose Market] Theater, Hamburg, on
5 May 1719.32

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 518; Groppo 522; Wiel 166; Alm 666; RV 701

1719/3 Ifigenia in Tauride' Music by Giuseppe Maria Orlandini**!
[IPHIGENEIA IN TAURIS]
A tragedia da cantarsi (5) Text by Benedetto Pasqualigo*
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1719-01-21
& Dedicated to Vincenzo Grimani*TM

In Greek mythology, Iphigeneia was taken to the Taurian mountains, where she was made a priestess
of Artemis by promising to kill all strangers. In this calling she recognized her long-lost brother Orestes

36 The dedicatee was the same as in La costanza trionfante (1716/3).

*7 Although the text rejected by the censors does not survive, the recommendation of the text in the 1716 and 1719 versions offers some clue
to the basis for the objection. The earlier version says, Le voci Deita, Destino, & altri simili sono scherzi poetichi, quali intendo che non abbino
punto d'interrompere la veneratione, che proffeso alla vera Religione. The later one says, Gli scherzi della penna poetica, che non hanno
alcun interesse con [ = che] sentimenti del Cuore Cattolico saranno da te considerati per dilettevoli vezzi dell'ingegno. This suggests that
the censors were concerned with broad questions of interpretation, not with mere words.

8 |_Rvat, AS, NV, N. 169, entry of 21 Gennaro 1719 (f. 38v). The duke of Guastalla, traveling incognito, and part of his court arrived on
c. 14 January, when he looked forward to the second round of operas (Arriv6 sul fine della passata totalmente incognito il Signore Duca di
Guastalla con parte della sua corte per godere del presente Carnevale, si come delle commedie, et opere le quali dovranno essere cambiate
di nuovi drami....). The duke had also been present for Carnival in 1718. In 1719 he left Venice shortly before 25 February (Joc. cit., f. 94).

 Merighi had an extensive career (1715-29) as a virtuosa in the service of Princess Violante Beatrice de' Medici in Florence.
> Talbot, Vivaldi, NGDMM/2. Six arias from the Hamburg work are in D-B.

33! The Florentine Orlandini (1676-1760) was an inordinately prolific composer. Although he spent most of his life in Florence, he was chiefly
active in Bologna between 1717 and 1731. Although little known today, except for his comic intermezzi, he was one of the best known opera
composers of his time.

3 Again using his pseudonym (Merindo Fesanio), Pasqualigo is here identified as being from the colony of the Signori Animosi, based in
the paternal palace [i.e., the Ca' Grimani at Santa Maria Formosa] of your excellency.

353 A descendant of one of the theater's co-founders.

346

OO

1719/4

OO w&

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

and escaped with him.** A tragedy on Martello's text concerning the same subject had been performed
without music at San Salvatore in 1711 (see Suppl. 3a). Pasqualigo offered a history of treatments of
the work in a note to listeners (as opposed to the usual readers). He cited the play by Racine, the
musical setting by Lodovico Dolce, and in recent months the anonymous prose manuscript set to music
for the court in Vienna.* He recommended this version for the dignity of the mythology, the
correctness (puntualita) of the poetry, and...the delicacy of the harmony, and says that it was difficult
to achieve this blend, given all the repugnant theatrical practices of Carnival, without producing a
monstrous deformity.

A license to print the libretto was issued on 15 January 1718 M.V. Jfigenia was first performed on 21
January 1719 (A*), when it elicited grand applause. Quite apart from the dignity of the mythology
involved, a rapid substitution for Astianatte (1719/1) was required. Faustina Bordoni sang in the title
role of this ambitious work with Antonio Bernacchi as Orestes. The work opened with a lavish depiction
of the temple of Diana, and most of the other scenes were intended to be regal or resplendent. The final,
sacrificial scene was to be adorned with pictures relating the mythology of Diana [and] Endymion.
The scenery designer was Romoaldo Mauro.

Arias in D-ROu, SHs, SWI; F-Pn; GB-Ob (Tenbury)TM!

Listed as Bonlini 529; Groppo 533; Wiel 174; Alm 678

Il pentimento generoso' Music by Andrea Stefano FioreTM
[THE GENEROUS REPENTANCE]

A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Madama Dulcinea e il Cuoco SORTING DATE: 1719-02-04

Dedicated to Prince Manuelle Lucchesi e del Bosco?

Lalli declined to give a synopsis of the plot, saying that it would be clear from the opening scene what
the work was about, but this was hardly the case. More than most works of its time, it can be termed
a historical pastiche. Lalli noted that some of the roles would deviate from dramatic traditions to satisfy
the need of a theater in which continual variety in the incidents [accidenti] is required. In the opening
scene, Aldaric (credited with a fiery, lascivious, but in the end generous character) has assumed the
throne of Sparta. The idiosyncracies of temperament of each of the other characters are carefully noted
and the chemistry between them probed.

Il pentimento opened on 4 Feburary 1719 (A, NV). A license to print the libretto was issued on 9
January 1718 [M.V.] for Carn. 1719. The libretto states that it was the udtim opera del Carnevale
1719 (at Sant' Angelo). Giuliano Albertini sang as Aldaric, with Vittoria Tesi as the Tunisian prince
Cario and Valentino Urbani as the African king Almansor. The scenography was by Marco Ricci.
Scores in D-WD; F-Pc; aria (attrib. Porta) in D-Dlb

Listed as Bonlini 530; Groppo 534; Wiel 176; Alm 679

338 The libretto is printed on an unusually wide page format and is prefaced with Latin quotations and a dedicatory sonnet in Italian.

3 This comment must have come quickly to Zeno's notice, for on 13 February [1719] (Lettere, ii, 27) he denied that he had based his text
for a recent production on an anonymous manuscript in Vienna.

340 T_Rvat, AS, NV, N. 69, f. 69v, gives the impression ofa later opening, saying on 4 Febraro 1718 that that opening took place ultimamente.
3" Also in GB-LbI as part of Handel's pastiche Elpidia (HWV A1; 1725).

3 Fiore was currently maestro di cappella at the court of Turin and a member of the Accademia Filarmonica (Bologna).

3% The libretto suggests that the dedicatee was of Sicilian origin. An alternative title for the intermezzi given with this work was I] marchese
del Bosco, which suggests an intended allusion.

34 The work is identified as // portamento generoso, o sia il tiranno ravveduto.

1719/5

i

es
OL

fi

 1719a
1719/6

i

rs)
OO x

fi

 1719b
1719/7

is)

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 347

Le pazzie degli amanti Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[THE MADNESS OF LOVERS]

A dramma da rappresentarsi in musica Text attributed to Francesco Passarini
Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1719-02-07~
Without dedicatee

Hercules' illicit love for Iole was so great, according to this account, that he donned a skirt and became
her servant. To win back his affections, his wife, Deianeira, sent him a garment dyed in the blood of
a centaur. Once he was wrapped himself in it, he went mad and threw himself into a fire, whereupon
Deianeira died of a broken heart. In the present work, which may have been derived from Frigimelica-
Roberti's Ercole in Cielo (1696/8), the story is reduced to a short pastoral for six characters. Under
the current title it was given in Rovigo in 1711. Le pazzie was intended to open just after 6 February
1718 M.V., when management relations were the subject of litigation.*"'

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 528; Groppo 532; Wiel 181; Alm 677

Ulisse il giovane. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Arianna abbandonata Music attributed to Giuseppe Boniventi
[ARIADNE ABANDONED]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Angelo Schietti*
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1719-10-25
Without dedicatee

Ariadne, the princess of Crete, was the daughter of the wicked ruler Minos, who ordered that seven
young men should be sacrificed to the minotaur in his labyrinth each year. After Ariadne rescued Theseus,
the prince of Athens, from the labyrinth by giving him a thread to retrace his steps, he fell in love with
Phaedra and abandoned Ariadne on Naxos. Arianna was first performed on 25 October 1719 (A, NV).
The singers were not identified. One scene in Act One portrayed royal rooms with mathematical
instruments. The labyrinth was featured in Act Two. The balli for courtesans, boat guides, and German
peasants  make no sense in the context of the story.

Arias previously in D-Dlb

Listed as Bonlini 531; Groppo 535; Wiel 179; Alm 680

Serenata for the Name-Day of the Emperor. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

La caduta di Gelone Music by Giuseppe Maria Buini*
[THE FALL OF GELON]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Rossi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1719-11-11
Without dedicatee

34! I_Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Attilio Centon, Busta 4029. Here the plaintiff, a middleman in the operation of the theater he claimed was
owned by Bernardo Michiel, recounted his travels and responsibilities on behalf of the theater and his lack of reimbursement or access to the

theater.

5 Schietti was a Venetian count.

38 The Bolognese Buini (1687-1739) was as often a librettist as a composer. His wife, Cecilia, was the daughter of the buffo singer Francesco
Belisari. Although his origins were humble, he served twice as the prince of the Accademia Filarmonica in Bologna. He composed at least
forty operas, principally for Bologna. Many were comic.

348



1719/8

mr"

Goo

1719/9

TI

i)
On

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Gelon, a Sicilian tyrant preceding Hieron (1708/6), made a claim to the Egyptian throne then held by
Orontes. After a fierce naval battle in which Orontes was almost killed, he triumphed to gain both the
throne and the hand of Gelon's intended, the princess Elissa of Carthage.*** Rossi said that because
his text was weak, it would serve only as an introduction to the more serious Carnival recitations
at Sant' Angelo. La caduta was first performed on 11 (A) or 12 (NV) November 1719. The principal
roles were taken by Matteo Lucchini (Gelone), Cecilia Bellisani (Elisa), and Domenico Borghi, who
made his debut as Orontes.** One ballo was rustic, the other heroic. The sets and scenery were
by Cristoforo Canal. Francesco Rossi, who was serving as impresario, made the unusual arrangement
of compensating the virtuosa Francesca Miniati (Florinda) with rents from particular boxes in lieu of
pay.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 532; Groppo 536; Wiel 175; Alm 681

Leucippe e Teonoe Music by Antonio Pollarolo
[LEUCIPPE AND THEONOE]

A tragedia per musica (5) Text attributed to Pietro Maria Suarez*
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1719-11-18
Without dedicatee

Theonoe, one of the two daughters of Thestor, prince of Samos, was abducted by corsairs and taken
in concubinage by their king, Icarus. The father was shipwrecked in his pursuit of the girl and
subsequently imprisoned. Theonoe's sister Leucippe, after cutting off her hair, went in pursuit of them
both. Theonoe, thinking her a priest, fell in love with him (i-e., her). Many discoveries and dramatic
actions ensued. The action was set in Jaffa.

Leucippe was first performed on 18 November 1719 (A, NV). It was still in production on 30 December
(A). Angelo Zannone, in the service of the prince of Darmstadt, sang as Thestor, with Diana Vico as
Theonoe and Faustina Bordoni as Leucippe. Antonio Pollarolo was styled a celebrated master in the
libretto. The story is traceable to Minato's Leucippe Phestia, set by Draghi (with contributions by Leopold
1) for Vienna in 1678.8

Arias in D-Dlb, SWI; F-Pc (prima)

Listed as Bonlini 533; Groppo 537; Wiel 172; Alm 682, 683

La pace per amore Music attributed to Fortunato Chelleri, Gius. Maria Buini
[PEACE IN EXCHANGE FOR LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Angelo Schietti
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1719-12-26
Without dedicatee

Idalma, the daughter of King Idomeneos, was destined to marry Adrastos. The plan was derailed after
she was kidnapped by her cousin. Adrastos, meanwhile, fell in love with Berenice, the daughter of the
late king Arsakes. La pace was first performed on 26 December 1719 (A). It was given in Treviso the
following year with the title // nemico amante, under which title it was revived at San Moise (1724/9).

3 Historically, Gelon was successful in fighting the Carthaginians. Elissa was an alias for Dido.

*5 Borghi was in the employ of the prince of Darmstadt. Borghi and Bellisani were satirized on the title-page of Marcello's caustic satire //
teatro alla moda (1720) in the phrase Stampato de' BORGHI di BELISANIA per ALDIVIVA [ = Vivaldi]....

+46 Gastone Vio, unpublished research.

7 Perhaps more correctly Pedro Maria Suarez, but his origins are untraceable.

+48 Groppo (MS, p. 186) did not consider these variants to be closely related.

1719/10

rT

[ay
O@E

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1710-19) 349

Perina Benati sang as Idalma, with Rosa Mignati (Adrasto) and Chiara Orlandi (Berenice). An
unprecedented number of arias was added at the end of the libretto.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 534; Groppo 538; Wiel 180; Alm 684, 685

La sorte nell'amore Music anonymous
[DESTINY IN LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1719-12-27
Without dedicatee

In this adaptation of Silvani's Gli imenei stabiliti, earlier set by Gasparini (1702/8), the venue has been
changed to Prussia. The production of La sorte opened on 27 December 1719 (A); a license to print
the libretto had been issued on 21 December. Francesca Miniati took the role of Aspasia, the queen
of Prussia, with Cecilia Bellisani as her rival Lavinia, Giovanna Scalfi as the Prussian prince Arbaces,
and Domenico Borghi as the Prussian gentleman Zoroaster. The ballo was for ridiculous characters.
Matteo Lucchini, a priest who sang in many minor roles including that of Oribantes here, was forbidden
by the Council of Ten on December 19th to travel outside Venice during the Carnival season without
the Council's express permission.*

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 535; Groppo 539; Wiel 178; Alm 686

*1-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 43, Fasc. 1719, item of 19 decembre 1719. Lucchini's lack of commitment was not without cause: on 20 August
1720 he was paid 20 ducats long owed him by the impresario Giovanni Orsato (Fasc. 1720, item of 20 Agosto 1720).

The 1720s: An Overview

he decade of the 1720s placed the past under a rosy
Si A generation of Europeans, impeded by war

since the turn of the century, now came to Venice
expecting to find the legendary splendors of earlier times.
Instead they encountered an escalation of ceremony and its
symbols. Among these symbols were the Ascension Fair and,
to advertise it, a new bucintoro  the golden galley on
which the doge sailed to the Lido to mark the annual
Wedding of Venice to the Adriatic.

So strong was the promotion of Ascension that a short
spurt of operas was regularly scheduled from 1722, inrough
coincidence with the mercantile fair held on the Piazza in
front of San Marco. The authorization was motivated by an
interest in generating more tax revenues from the fair itself,
not by any interest in promoting operas per se. (Comedies
were not given during the Ascension period.) Ascension
opera soon became categorically different from autumn and
winter opera. The audience for spring opera was largely a
transient one. Subjects were often pastoral or comic. The
works were usually shorter than those given at other times
of year. Since the number of performances was relatively
few, it was extremely difficult for theaters to realize a profit
from Ascension productions unless the works were staged
simply. Since few concessions were made to staging,
Ascension opera generally increased the debt load of the
three participating theaters.

Summary numbers for the decade (Figure 25) fail to
delineate the ways in which spring opera, however modest
it was in character, changed the comparative profiles of
theaters and theatrical periods. For San Samuele, which
initiated the practice, opera itself was a departure from its
near monopoly on comedy, which it continued to provide
in the autumn and winter. Rising (after its fashion) to the
occasion, Sant'Angelo managed to operate steadily in all
three seasons. San Moise, which offered more operas than
any other theater during this decade, participated in spring
opera by employing the troupe model of production. The
benefit to San Moise was short-lived, because troupes such
as that of Antonio Denzio developed their own new markets
in Ljubljana, Graz, Prague, and elsewhere.

Sant'Angelo and San Giovanni Grisostomo ranked
closely behind San Moise in the number of works they gave.

At San Giovanni, which eschewed spring opera, the increase
resulted from a vigorous winter schedule. San Giovanni often
presented two works between St. Stephen's and Shrove
Tuesday, and they were usually based on new texts. After
almost thirty years of vigorous activity, San Cassiano began
to recede to the sidelines. San Fantin ceased operations in
1720. Numbers mask the increasingly speckled successes
of San Giovanni Grisostomo, which now had to contend with
the financial consequences of the Peace of Passarowitz.
Rising prosperity in many other parts of Europe left
Venetian theaters unable to compete for the services of
home-grown musicians. Since San Giovanni had always
sought to engage superstars, it was the theater most vulnera-
ble to these changes. Bonlini's ruminations on the economic
changes apparent in 1720 (Le glorie, p. 183) note that

it used to be that if a singer of high rank and a voice of
rare beauty commanded more than 100 scudi, the salary
was considered excessive and exceptional (un oggetto
di meraviglia). [The ordinary rate was] a cause for the
invention of the label a cento vinti [a 120] for an
expensive singer. But that proverb has fallen into disuse
because in our time an ordinary salary is often greater
than the exorbitant sum of 1,000 zecchini....This has
led to the immodest pretensions of all singers and has
brought negative consequences to theatrical interests.

One of the clearest evidences that Bonlini's perspective was
generally valid is that, in contrast to the continued practice
of casting castrati in male leads, Sant' Angelo rapidly shifted
to the use of females (and relatively unknown ones, at that)
in male roles.

Even as performers divided their attention between
Venice and other venues, the demand for certain attributes
of performance (excellent voices, affective performance)
was increasingly met by occasional works given under
private auspices. A robust increase in the performance of
serenatas and other entertainments at ambassadorial functions
(Suppl. 5a) occurred. Academic assemblies at which any
member of the educated public was welcome, irrespective
of social rank (Suppl. 7), were also in ascent. The Albrizzian
Society, which hosted these gatherings, established the first
public library in Venice. Altogether, the number of docu-
mented meta-operas more than doubled. This rise was dis-

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29)

351

Oo Sant'Angelo.

@ San Cassiano
@ San Fantin

@ San Gio. Grisostomo

OSS. Gio. e Paolo |
@ San Moise
@ San Salvatore

San Samuele |
@ Other _ |

 |

1715

FIGURE 25. Comparison of works per theater in the 1710s and 1720s.

proportionate to a twenty percent increase in the number of
operas given. This attests in part to strenuous polemics of
musical taste. Advocates of taste, as opposed to virtuoso
excess, often preferred the serenata. The rise of amateur
music-making concurrently led to the augmentation of
orchestras at private functions by players (generally noble-
men) trained by the principals. This accommodation of
personal involvement was a reincarnation of the engineer-
ing expertise noblemen had contributed to the staging of
opera a generation earlier. The void caused by the absence
of physical war was filled by an intellectual battle between
partisans of the Ancients and Moderns. The debate was a
sharp one, its divisions evident in the growing divide
between the classical subjects treated at San Giovanni
Grisostomo and the more fanciful and increasingly satirical
ones found at Sant' Angelo and San Moise.

The great champion of the Ancients was Pietro Meta-
stasio, a Neapolitan whose rise to fame between 1724 and
the end of the decade was phenomenal. Metastasio's
subjects, though straight from the annals of ancient history,
found a following less for their grounding in the glorious
past than for their subtle characterizations and dramatic
intricacies. In contrast to the quasi-historical subjects with
fictional overlays which had filled the Venetian stage for
a half century, Metastasio's works were characterized by
inevitable conflicts of personal affection and patriotic duty,
the seemingly insoluble moral dilemmas they posed, and
denouements hinging on seemingly unimportant physical
cues which led to a central moment of revelation. Audiences
found in these dramas a new cause for attention to the text.
Metastasio's works soon became so firmly entrenched in

the opera world that many dominated European stages for
the balance of the century.

One asset of the dramma per musica, and of our
knowledge of it, was the arrival towards the end of the
decade of the sons of some of Britain's leading families, who
sought to determine, after two decades of Italian opera at
the Royal Academy in London, how to establish an Opera
of the Nobility. Their brief presence made a significant
contribution to the survival rate of scores for the decade.
English attention to Venetian opera was loosely associated
with the ascension of George II (1727), who inherited his
father's box at San Moise but seems rarely, if ever, to have
used it.

The composer best represented by surviving scores is
Vivaldi, whose operas and other works are largely preserved
in Turin. As Vivaldi increasingly appeared elsewhere, his
services to Sant' Angelo (and San Moise) became halting.
His reputation abroad grew by leaps and bounds. By the end
of the decade he had become (in succession to Pollarolo, who
died in 1723) a figure of great fascination to the emperor,
Charles VI. With one exception he eschewed Metastasian
subjects. They appealed mainly to the English, whose love
of antiquities was generally greater still than that of Venetian
nobles. The fact that Metastasio was Neapolitan inspired
Neapolitan composers (e.g., Vinci, Leo, and Porpora) to set
his texts, but the same composers merely passed through
Venice. They did not linger there.

The nemesis of those who favored the Ancients was a
free spirit from Bologna named Giuseppe Maria Buini. Buini
wrote the texts for many of his own good-humored musical
works. The modern Bolognese singers who had been

352

gathering in Venice for years were mercilessly satirized by
Benedetto Marcello in // teatro alla moda [The Theater in
Vogue] of 1720, but that did nothing to diminish their ranks.
Il teatro is generally taken to refer especially to practices
at Sant' Angelo, a theater founded by his forebears. Marcel-
lo, a prolific composer of pastoral and dramatic cantatas,
was a pillar of the Ancients. His landmark work, settings

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

they constituted an singular monument to literary and
musical classicism. Yet Marcello's antiquity was strikingly
different from that of Metastasio.

Documentary accounts of Venetian opera are given
generously in avvisi, in the perfunctory records of the papal
legate, and, from 1725, in the Diario ordinario. English
diplomatic letters containing relevant content also survive

of vernacular texts of the first fifty Psalms of David(1724- in abundance.
26), was packaged in eight volumes containing their

discursive prefaces and effusive testimonials. Collectively

The 1720s: Chronology

1720/1 Paride

[PARIS]
A dramma per musica (5)
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo
With a ballo
rs Without dedicatee
In this variant of the myth recounted in 1706/5, Paris, the son of Priam and Hecuba, having been raised
by shepherds on Mt. Ida for his safety, had now reached manhood. He had successfully defended the
interests of Troy in a naval battle and was falsely believed to be dead when the action began.
Paride opened on 13 January 1720 (NV), when it produced universal satisfaction. The principal singers
 Bartolomeo Bartoli (Paride), Antonio Zannoni (Priamo), and Faustina Bordoni (Enone)  were
all under German protection (by the houses of Darmstadt, Bavaria, and the Palatine respectively).
Orlandini's post as maestro di cappella to the Grand Duke of Tuscany and his membership in the
Accademia Filarmonica of Bologna were cited in the libretto. Following his entry on this work, Bonlini
provided an important historical note (quoted in the overview) about the overall decline in the economic
health of the opera houses.
A Arias in D-B (2), Shs, SWI; F-Pc; GB-Mp; I-Re

Listed as Bonlini 536; Groppo 540; Wiel 184; Alm 687

Music by Giuseppe Maria Orlandini

Text by Francesco Muazzo!
SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
SORTING DATE: 1720-01-13

M1

QOL

1720/2 La figlia che canta

[THE DAUGHTER WHO SINGS]
A divertimento comico

Music attributed to Antonio Pollarolo

Text attributed to Francesco Passarini

Mr Performed at San Fantin SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1720-01-15~
is) Without dedicatee

"A Venetian nobleman. This was his only opera libretto, although he states in a note to the reader that he had written a tragedy on the same
subject in his youth.

? Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 183: Come che l'opere in musica sono fatte negozio in Venezia, pitt che in ogni altro luogo d' Italia, il cedersi in questi
tempi ridotti i teatri maggiori alle medesime aperti, al ristrettissimo numero di questo solo di S. Gio: Grisostomo, converra ragionevolmente
dedurne, che li soliti guadagni si siano andati facendo assai languidi. E per verita  forza, che ecceda la spesa all' utile, da che s'e posta in uso
la produzion de' tesori, per condurre un solo cantante di qualche grido. Tempo gia fu, che il dispendio per una voce assai bella, si stimava
assai raro, quando eccedeva la summa di cento scudi, e che s'era reso oggetto di meraviglia, sino a passare in proverbio per la bocche comuni
chi arrivd a conseguirne cento vinti la prima volta. Ma qual paragone e da farsi de' tempi andati con i presenti, mentre a nostri giorni si va
rendendo quasi ordinario il premio esorbitante d' oltre mille zecchini, e chi pud vantare qualche singolare prerogativa sopra gl' altri della sua
professione....

o

1720/3

OL

fi

 1720a
1720/4

m1

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 353

La figlia should have opened early in the official Carnival period. A license to print the libretto was
issued on 8 January 1720; title-page of the libretto was dated 1719. It was a short, comic work apparently
given by a troupe (it contains no cast list). As staged, it could have been an early prototype for singing-
teacher genre soon to be popularized in the intermezzo repertory. Attilio Cestari (Manteca), the
impresario, announced in the libretto that this would be his final production for San Fantin, because
he and his casts were discouraged by frequent disturbances and insults in the theater. Instead of giving
pleasure and making people smile, his entertainments only seemed to elicit outrage. He begged the
audience to suffer the imperfections of this short work (which, he said, had been put together in a few
days) in silence.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 537; Groppo 541; Wiel 182; Alm 688

Armida delusa* Music by Giuseppe Maria Buini
[ARMIDE DELUDED]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1720-01-24
Without dedicatee

In this account, Armide (Francesco Miniati), a figure from the First Crusade in many previous libretti,
and the famous enchantments of her palace were countered by the magic swords of Ubald (Domenico
Borghi) and Guelph/Guelfo (Margarita Gaspari), who were sent by Geoffrey/Goffredo.

This third drama was first performed on 24 January 1720 (A). A license to print the libretto had been
issued on 22 January 1719 [M.V.], although the title-page was dated 1720. A note from Buini says
that the work was written in a few hours. The impresario Francesco Rossi was taken to task by the
Council of Ten on 30 January for failing to pay the instrumentalists and stage crew punctually.>

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 538; Groppo 542; Wiel 186; Alm 689

Serenata in the Turkish style. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Griselda Music by Giuseppe Maria Orlandini
[GRISELDA]

A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1720-05-08

Dedicated to George [Lord] Parker*
The shepherdess Griselda, seen by the mythical king Walter/Gualtiero of Sicily at a hunt, becomes the
object of his affection, later his wife, and then the mother of his daughter Oronta, who is raised as a
commoner. Oronta later weds Conrad/Corrado, the son of Walter, who in this account feigns repudiation
of Griselda to trap his enemy Otto.*

3 |-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Fasc. 1719 [sic], entry of 30 Genaro 1719. [M.V.].

* Chancellor of Great Britain, Parker was to be the dedicatee of Edward Wright's Observations made in traveling through France, Italy, &c
in the years 1720, 1721, and 1722 (London, 1730) and is therefore likely to have been in the same entourage as Wright, who was still present
in Venice in February 1721.

5 In Giovanni Boccaccio's Decameron the emphasis was on the cruel tasks which Walter/Gualtiero imposed on his peasant wife to allow her
to demonstrate her complete commitment to him.

354



1720/5

1720/6

mM

Ps)
Coe

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Griselda opened on 8 May 1720 (A). It and Gl'inganni (1720/5) were the first works to be given during
the Ascension fair since the 1640s. With the exceptions of Gio. Battista Carboni of Mantua (Gualtiero)
and Rosaura Mazzanti of Florence (Griselda), the principal singers were Bolognese.

Zeno's text had first been set by Antonio Pollarolo (1701/5) for San Cassiano. Orlandini's musical setting
had first been performed in Mantua in 1717. An intermediate version of the work, given in Recanati
early in 1720, contained additional music by Tinazzoli.

Arias in A-Wn (Este)

Listed as Bonlini 539; Groppo 543; Wiel 189; Alm 690

GP inganni fortunati Music attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
[THE FORTUNATE DECEPTION]

A pastorale per musica Text attributed to Belisario Valeriani'
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With Elpina e Silvano* SORTING DATE: 1720-05-08

Dedicated to Count Giovanni Negrobon?

In this short Arcadian plot, derived from La caccia in Etolia Modena, 1716) but reminiscent of 1717/12,
the beautiful Atalanta, raised in the wild, renounced her wedding vows to Meleager, despite his having
presented her with a boar's hide from a Calydonian hunt. Adopting the assumed names of Amarilli
and Tirsi, the two met and fell in love once again. The first Venetian performance of Gli'inganni was
given on 8 May 1720(A). A license to print the libretto had been issued on 4 May. The plot of Handel's
Atalanta (HWV 35; London, 1736) was derived from this text.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 540; Groppo 544; Wiel 188; Alm 691

Il Filindo Music by Giuseppe Maria Buini
[FILINDO]

A pastorale eroica per musica Text attributed to Dom. Maria Creta'
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Aurilla e Cola SORTING DATE: 1720-10-19

Dedicated to Count Jean-Augustin Berd"

In this pastoral the beautiful nymph Dori (Caterina Borghi) was pursued by both Cileno (Caterina Teresa
Cantelli) and Filindo (Felice Novelli). She was partial to the latter but undermined his chances of
succeeding to the throne. The first Venetian performance occurred on 19 October 1720 (A, NV).!? On
2 November it was eliciting universal satisfaction (A). A chorus of nymphs, shepherds, and hunters
participated in the staging. Filindo was still running on 23 November (A). A license to print the libretto

 Groppo (MS, p. 189) says that the practice had not been seen for many years, but with regard to opera specifically, the only publically
performed work for which a spring performance can be documented was Rovetta's Ercole in Lidia in 1645 (Evelyn, Diary, p. 137).

Revised, according to Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 618), by Marino Rossetti. Fioravanti's work of the same name (Naples, 1788) is not considered
to have any connection.

5 The libretto was published (Sartori 13395).

 A military leader, probably of Brescian origin.

' This work is usually attributed to Pietro d' Averara, on the basis of the citations of Groppo and Wiel, but the 1720 libretto says nothing about
the authorship. The libretto was reprinted in Venice in 1724 for a production in Vicenza (Sartori 10268, a libretto now lost from I-Mb), specifies
Creta as the librettist and Buini as the composer.

" The family name is Alsacian. The dedicatee's specific identity is unknown.

"2 A note in the libretto indicates that the work had been given in a foreign court some years earlier.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 355

(for Dori e Filindo) had been issued on 7 October 1720.'3 Numerous other (unattributed) productions
of the work were given in northern Italy throughout the decade. With revisions and recasting, the text
was to be extremely well received in Antonio Pollarolo's later setting (Nerina, 1728/6).

A Arias in D-Mbs
Listed as Bonlini 541; Groppo 545; Wiel 187; Alm 692

1720/7 La verita in cimento Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[TRUTH IN CONTENTION]
A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Palazzi and Domenico Lalli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Fiammetta e Pancrazio'* SORTING DATE: 1720-10-26
& Dedicated to Count Sava Vladislavich'*
 Damira was loved by Mahmud, who was married to Rustena. Both women bore him sons on the same

day. The illegitimate Melindos and the legitimate Zelim were raised with mistaken identities, which
complicated their apparent rights of succession to the throne. An opening was announced for the 12th,
then reported to have occurred on 26 October 1720 (NV), when the work was received with universal
satisfaction (A); a license to print the libretto had been issued on 3 October. The production was still
running on 23 November (A), apparently with a revised first act.'6

 Antonio Barbieri (Mamud), who was to sing in twenty-two later operas in Venice, made his Venetian
debut in this work. A tenor, Barbieri was noted for his skills in vocal inflection and ornamentation,
for which reason he served as maestro di manieri at the Ospedale de' Mendicanti (1736-67).'' During
his first years in Venice he enjoyed the protection of Vivaldi's patron, Prince Philip, Landgrave of Hesse-
Darmstadt. La verita also included Girolamo Albertini (Ze/im), who was protected by Prince Karl of
Hesse-Kassel. Anna Maria Strada (Rosane), who was employed by Count Gio. Battista Colloredo, the
governor of Milan, made her Venetian debut in this work.'*

BS The libretto for this work was the first to identify the Romans Giuseppe and Domenico Valeriani, who
were pupils of Marco Ricci, as its scenery painters. By 1721, they were given their own box at the theater.
Swiney recommended them in 1727 to the Royal Academy as the two greatest men in their profession."
They had illustrious careers in Venice through 1731.

fi Score in I-Tn; arias in D-Dlb, Mbs; F-Pc, Pn; I-Nc, Tn; and S-L
Listed as Bonlini 542; Groppo 546; Wiel 185; Alm 693; RV 739

' The fede for another Filindo issued on 13 May 1724 appears to be the work ona text by Domenico Maria Creta. It was produced with Buini's
music in Vicenza in that year. See Sartori 10268.

4 Or Il vecchio avaro. Strohm (Opernarien, ii, 251) claims that a second set of intermezzi (unnamed) was given with this work.

'S At the time a councillor to the czar, Sava Vladislavich-Raguzinsky (c. 1670-1738) later served in a number of diplomatic posts, most notably
in China (1726-27), where he helped to establish the border between the two countries. He may still have been in Venice on 14 February 1722,
when he entertained Counts Lubomirski, Taxis, and Charachin (NV).

' Pancino (Le opere, iii, 7, 16) calls attention to these revisions and itemizes the components of the score vis-a-vis both libretti.
'' Barbieri also served briefly at the Ospedaletto (1741-43).

'8 Strada (called Strada del Pd) also was noted for her vocal ornamentation (in particular the shake or trill) in Handel operas given in London
between 1729 and 1738. According to Burney (IV, 342), Handel characterized her as a coarse singer with a fine voice, and provided some
thirty opportunities for her shake in the first aria she sang in her London debut (Lotario, 1729).

' Gibson, Royal Academy, p.375. Swiney (c. 1684-1754), who, as Owen McSwiney [also Swiney, MacSwiney], had been involved in productions
of Italian opera in London early in the century, was one of the most colorful (and least trustworthy) figures of the opera world. He was instrumental
in introducing the young painter Canaletto (Gio. Antonio Canal, 1697-1768) to Charles Lennox (1701-50), the second duke of Richmond,
and the wealthy English merchant Joseph Smith (c. 1674-1770). It was for these and other English patrons that Canaletto honed his skills as
a view painter.

356

1720/8

ry

&
COe

1720/9

im

a


A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Teodorico Music by Giovanni Porta
[THEODORIC]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Salvi
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With intermezzi SORTING DATE: 1720-11-19

Dedicated to Eleonora Rambaldo!

The Ostrogothic king Theodoric aspired to emulate Odovacar, the king of the Heruli. The historical
figure conquered much of the Italian peninsula in the last years of the fifth century. Among the highlights
of his long reign were his siege [491] and conquest [493] of Ravenna and his imprisonment of Pope
John I. The fictional Theodoric depicted here imprisoned Odovacar (an apparent substitute for the
pope), where he taunted him with false offers of his daughter Hostilia, who was loved by the Greek
prince Antigonos. The first Venetian performance of Teodorico was given on 19 November 1720 (NV).
lit was received with universal satisfaction (A). A license to print the libretto had been issued on
the 9th. Francesco Guicciardi sang in the title role with Gaetano Borghi (Odoacre) and Faustina Bordoni
(Ostilia). The text was reset by Buini for performance at the Teatro Formigliari, Bologna, in 1728.
Arias in D-Mbs

Listed as Bonlini 543; Groppo 547; Wiel 183; Alm 694

Lucio Papirio dittatore' Music by Antonio Pollarolo
[Luctus PAPIRIUS DICTATOR]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Agostino Piovene
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1720-12-26

Dedicated to Theophilus Hastings

Lucius Papirius led the Romans to war against the Samnites in the fourth century BC.TM As set by Predieri
for Sant' Angelo five years earlier (1715/1), the figure of the dictator's daughter, Papiria, was introduced.
She became the wife of Quintus Fabius, the son of the consul Marcus Fabius. The first Venetian
performance was on 26 December 1720 (A); a license to print the libretto had been issued on 15 December
1720. The title-page was dated 1721. Gaetano Borghi portrayed Lucius, with Faustina Bordoni as his
daughter, and Diana Vico (who frequently took male roles) as Quintus Fabius. The work opened grandly,
outside the temple of Jupiter, where slaves could be seen pulling a carriage over a bridge across the
Tiber.

A different adaptation of Zeno's text, which had first been set by Caldara (Vienna, November 1719),
was used in Handel's arrangement of Giacomelli's Lucio Papirio (HWV A6; King's Theatre, London,
1732). Revised versions were set by Porpora (San Cassiano, 1737) and Hasse (Dresden, 1742). The
text was in use through the time of Paisiello, who set it for Naples in 1767.

Arias in D-Mbs, SWI

Listed as Bonlini 544; Groppo 548; Wiel 192; Alm 695

? Title not given; Rosa Ongarelli and Antonio Ristorini are listed with the cast, however. This suggests that the production at Sant' Angelo
(La verita in cimento) had been concluded and the intermezzi could have been Fiammetta e Pancrazio.

2! Maria Eleonora Josepha, daughter of the general Guido, Count Stahremberg, who defended Vienna against the Turks in 1683. By marrying
Antonio Rambaldo in 1706, she became the countess of Collalto.

2 King of the Ostrogoths from 475, Theodoric occupied Verona, Milan, and Pavia in 489. He was declared king of Italy in 493, entered Rome
in 500, and died in 526 AD.

3 The count of Huntingdon, Hastings was a prominent English patron of opera in the 1720s. He may have been traveling in the company of
Charles Lennox, the second duke of Richmond, and Lord [William] Cadogan (1672-1726), whose presence in Venice was reported on 21

January 1721 (NV).

4 Or the Roman year 430, as it is styled in the libretto.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 357

1720/10 __ Filippo, re di Macedonia Music by Giuseppe Boniventi (1-2);
[PHILIP, KING OF MACEDONIA] Antonio Vivaldi (3)?
A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With Melinda e Tiburzio SORTING DATE: 1720-12-27

rs) Dedicated to Marquis Giovanni Battista de' Mori
Oo The historical Philip reigned in the fourth century BC. In Lalli's libretto, the future king was an adolescent

whose widowed mother and regent, Eurydice, was eager to retain her political power. She attempted

to thwart his proposed marriage to Olympiade by imposing a law to prevent Macedonian royals from

marrying foreigners. Filippo was first performed on 27 December 1720 (A); a license to print the libretto

had been issued on the 17th. The title-page was dated 1721. Girolamo Albertini appeared in the title

role with Antonia Merighi (Euridice) and Chiara Orlandi (Olimpiade). The run may have been brief.'
A No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 545; Groppo 549; Wiel 196; Alm 696; RV 715

1720/11 L'Arsacide' Music attributed to Fortunato Chelleri
[ARSAKIDES]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Zaniboni*
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With Dorisbe e Petronio SORTING DATE: 1720-12-28
& Dedicated to Marquis Carlo Filippo Pepoli
Ow Inthe ancient Parthian Empire, Seleukos was assassinated by Arsakides, who sacked his victim's domain.

As related here, much of the plot was freely invented. A two-page list of textual errors is appended
to the libretto. L 'Arsacide was first performed on 28 December 1720 (A), the date of dedication of the
libretto, which had been licensed on the 16th; the title-page is dated 1721. This was the first work for
San Moise with which the scenographer Antonio Mauro was associated; he was soon offered three
boxes for his personal use.* Angelo Maria Cantelli sang in the title role.

A Arias in D-Mbs
Listed as Bonlini 546; Groppo 550; Wiel 200; Alm 697

1721/1 Antigona Music by Giuseppe Maria Orlandini
[ANTIGONE]
A tragedia ristretta ad uso di cantarsi (5) Text by Benedetto Pasqualigo
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Melinda e Tiburzio; Serpilla e BacoccoTM SORTING DATE: 1721-01-15~
& Without dedicatee

5 The paths of Boniventi and Vivaldi may have crossed several times previously, through their sporadic involvements with the Mantuan court
and with the princes of Hesse and Baden. At this time, Boniventi was employed by Louis, prince of Baden-Baden; Vivaldi, in common with
Antonio Barbieri (Antigono in Filippo) and Antonio Ristorini (Petronio in the intermezzi), was in the employ of the prince of Hesse-Darmstadt.

26 Comparison with the account given in Filippo, re di Grecia (1706/2) shows an enormous difference in outlook. A Venetian nobleman who
married someone from outside the Republic automatically lost his seat in the Maggior Consiglio.

27 See the commentary for Antigona below.

?8 Zanibon(i) was from a prominent Bolognese family.

 The Pepoli were a prominent Bolognese family who, from 1726, were patrons of Carlo Broschi (Farinelli).
> Unpublished research by Gastone Vio.

3! Only this intermezzo is cited (under the title // marito giuocatore e la moglie bacchettona) in Groppo (MS, p. 191). A printed libretto (Sartori
15404) exists for Melinda e Tiburzio, and Wiel (Teatri, p. 61) associates it with this work.

358



1721/2

1721/3

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

The plot focuses on the wish of Antigone (Antonia Margherita Merighi), the only surviving offspring
of Oedipus, that the order of the tyrant Creon (Antonio Barbieri) prohibiting the burial of her brother
Polynikes/Polinice be defied. Texts for the prologue and intermezzi were published separately.
This concert production of the work previously given at San Cassiano (1718/6), ifit was indeed a third
opera of this cycle, must have been substituted for a poorly received work (presumably Vivaldi's Filippo
[1720/10]) around 15 January 1721. The production of Antigona is in a class of its own, since concert
performances of operas in public theaters were otherwise unknown in Venice. However, the theater
managers could have been parading Pasqualigo's impeccable standing among Arcadians to redress
the harsh portrayal of theatrical decadence unleashed (especially vis-a-vis Sant' Angelo) in Marcello's
recently published satire J] teatro alla moda.

Score in GB-Lbl (Bologna, 1727); excerpts (Venice, 1721) in US-SFu (terza)

Listed as Bonlini 547; Groppo 551; Wiel 195; Alm 698

Cleofile Music by Giuseppe Maria Buini
[CLEOPHYLE]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Zaniboni
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Cola mal maritatoTM SORTING DATE: 1721-01-27~
Without dedicatee*

The plot of this short work deals with a complicated arrangement for the rights of succession between
the twin daughters, Ida (Cecilia Belisani) and Dorismene (Caterina Teresa), of the widowed queen
Cleophyle (Caterina Borghi). A license to print the libretto was issued on 27 January 1720, which must
be M.V. because the title-page is dated 1721.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 548; Groppo 552; Wiel 201; Alm 699

Nerone' Music by Giuseppe Maria Orlandini
[NERO]

A tragedia per musica Text attributed to Agostino Piovene
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With an abbattimento, a ballo, and a giuoco SORTING DATE: 1721-02-11
Without dedicatee

This account of the life of Nero emphasizes the ambitions of his mother, Agrippina, and his own
treacherous dealings with his first wife, Octavia, in order to pursue his second, Poppea. The subject
had various partial predecessors in Venetian opera history, among them Monteverdi's L incoronazione
di Poppea (text by Businello; 1642), Pallavicino's Nerone (text by Corradi; 1678/8), and Pollarolo's
Il ripudio d'Ottavia (text by Noris, 1699/3).

Nerone was first performed onc. 11 February 1721 (A) with deafening applause (indecibile applauso).
A license to print the libretto was issued on 30 January 1720 M.V.; the title-page is dated 1720. Gaetano
Borghi sang in the title role, with Faustina Bordoni (Ottavia), Francesca Cuzzoni (Poppea), and Diana

 Its printing license was issued on 10 October 1720. The title page was also dated 1720, suggesting that it appeared before the end of the
year. Although Vivaldi has generally been taken (on the basis of an interpretation of the title-page drawing) to be the chief target of the work,
two of the three Sant' Angelo operas staged immediately prior to this license (1719/7, 1720/3) were by Buini; the third (1719/10) was anonymous.
(Vivaldi's La verita in cimento and Filippo both opened after the satire had gone to press on 10 October 1720.)

> The title in Bologna was La fedelta coronata; the work opened on 14 June.

* With roles for Aurilla and Cola (see listings in Suppl. 4). Wiel (Teatri, p. 63) also lists Dorisbe e Petronio, for which there is no confirmation.
However, it was in the repertory of the same performers and had been given with the work immediately preceding at San Moise.

35 Although dedicatees were sparse in this year, it is known that three English gentlemen, one being Charles Lennox, the duke of Richmond,
were frequenting the theaters in February (Mercurio storico, xxxviii, 40).

1721/4

i



OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 359

Vico (Agrippina). Orlandini's setting had nearly four dozen performances between 1723 and 1738.
Piovene's text was also set by Giuseppe Vignatti for performance in Milan at the end of 1724.

The libretto carefully notes the grand scale of the scenes, particularly the vast courtyard, fitted out
for the coronation of Tiridates, shown at the opening of the work, and the vast hall in which machines
representing the four elements (Earth, Air, Fire, Water) descend in the third act.

Edward Wright described both scenes in considerable detail. His account of the scenery in this Nerone
seems suspiciously close to St. Didier's of Pallavicino's Nerone (1678/8), but apparently the battle
scene (abbattimento) from the earlier work was intentionally revived. In the coronation scene, he said,
the emperor and empress appeared in a chariot drawn by an elephant. Wright related that the Head,
Trunk, and Eyes...move as if alive, and Tiridates believes he is so....All of a sudden, as soon as the
Emperor and Empress are dismounted...the Triumphal Chariot is transform'd into an Amphitheatre,
and fill'd with Spectators. The Elephant falls all in pieces, and out of his Belly come a great number
of Gladiators...so that he seems in a moment to be transform'd into a company of arm'd Men, who
make a Skirmish, all in time to the Musick.**

Wright's account also noted that in the hall scene were represented the four Elements, emblematically,
in Picture; these, opening themselves, form'd two Palaces, those of Love and Hymen. These again were
transform'd into the Palace (or Temple) of Mars, all surrounded with Weapons of War. This Scene
was so finely imagin'd, and the Lights so well dispos'd, that I think it was the most entertaining Sight
I ever saw upon a Stage.* Alberto Bruni was the director of these two scenes.

Score in D-B;** arias in D-B (3), Hs, Mbs, Swl (5); F-Pc, Pn; GB-Cfm, Ob (Tenbury); US-Wlc
Listed as Bonlini 549; Groppo 553; Wiel 191; Alm 700

Il pastor fido Music by Carlo Luigi Pietro Grua
[THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD]

A tragicommedia pastorale (5) Libretto adapted by Benedetto Pasqualigo
Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With intermezzi SORTING DATE: 1721-02-11
Without dedicatee

In this classic Arcadian tale, the conflicting lines of love are framed with such artifacts of antiquity
as sacrificial victims and oracular messages. Bonlini termed the text a royal drama and pointed to
its earlier performance in Turin (without music).*!

The first Venetian performance, on 11 February 1721 (A), was received with satisfaction. A license
to print the libretto had been issued on 26 January 1720 M.V.; the title-page is dated 1721. The libretto
was printed in Padua. Its twelve roles were taken (in Venice) by ten singers. Among them, the intermezzo
performers Rosa Ongarelli and Antonio Ristorini were cast within the drama as Corisca and a satyr.
The principal nymphs were Antonia Merighi (Amarilli) and Anna Maria Strada (Dorinda), with
Girolamo Albertini and Chiara Orlandi [sic] as the shepherds Mirtillo and Silvio.

36 Edward Wright, Some Observations Made in Travelling through France, Italy, etc. (London, 1730), i, 84.

37 Op. cit., quoted in Nagler, Source Book, pp. 267f.

38 In the hand of Mattheson, with recitative in German (Kirkendale, Court Musicians, p. 519). Facs. edn. in DMV, xiv.

3 Grua was maestro di cappella of the Elector Palatine, who was also the protector of Faustina Bordoni.

* From Gio. Battista Guarini's tragicommedia in verse (1602).

*' Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 187.

 Like Ristorini, Ongarelli was now in the employ of Prince Philip of Darmstadt. Their contributions probably constituted the intermezzi.

* In December 1729 Paolo Rolli praised the singing of Strada as better than the two who have left us (Cuzzoni and Bordoni) on account
of her penetrating thread of a soprano voice which delights the ear (quotation from Deutsch, Handel, p. 249). He praised Merighi as really
a perfect actress in the same letter.

360

fi

1721a
1721b
 1721c

1721/5

rT

&
XO)

1721/6

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

The textual history of Guarini's // pastor fido is too lengthy to recount here. In association with staging
involving music, it can be traced to the tragicomedia pastorale printed both in Venice and in Ferrara
in 1590, in both cases for the wedding of Carlo Emanuele, the duke of Savoy, and Caterina of Austria.
Cori were required at the ends of acts from 1594. Because it was reprinted so many times, all kinds
of miscellany (annotations, figures, poems) became attached to it. A large number of editions from
1602 carried a dedication to Vicenzo Gonzaga. After 1630 there were many fewer new prints. The best
known production in the decade preceding Grua's setting was Handel's (HWV 8; 1712).

Score in A-Wgm

Listed as Bonlini 550; Groppo 554; Wiel 197; Alm 701

Il pescatore disingannato. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
Il ratto di Ganimede trasformato in Alinda. Cf. Suppl. 7.

L'onesta trionfante. Cf. Suppl. 8.

L'inganno fortunato Music attributed to Giuseppe Boniventi
[THE FORTUNATE DECEPTION]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from G. B. Sara by Bartolomeo Pavieri
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1721-10-11

Dedicated to Antonio Litta

The Hindustani ruler Arbakes (Andrea Costa) was under siege by the troops of Antillus. Much of the
drama in this short work hinges on the fate of his daughter Armilla (Luigia Villanova), who, disguised
as a man, has been taken prisoner. L 'inganno fortunato was first performed on 11 October 1721 (A),
when it was greeted with universal applause. A license to print the libretto had been issued on 27
September 1721.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 552; Groppo 556; Wiel 198; Alm 703

Cimene Music attributed to Girolamo Bassani and Matteo (?) Lucchini*
[XIMENE]

A tragedia da cantarsi (5) Text by Benedetto Pasqualigo
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Vespetta e Scannacapone; balli SORTING DATE: 1721-10-18

Without dedicatee

As in II pastor fido, Pasqualigo explains that he has made an adaptation of language, medium, and
theatrical culture by adapting this text from Corneille's Le Cid (1636).* In this story set in Seville,
Ximene (of Toledo) was obliged by duty to follow her beloved Rodrigo, the murderer of her father,
the count of Gormas, to his death. Cimene was first performed on 18 October 1721 (A), when it was
well received, although the cast, which included Rosaura Mazzanti (Cimene) and Giovanni Rapaccioli
(Rodrigo), was little known.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 551; Groppo 555; Wiel 194; Alm 702

* A Milanese nobleman.

5 Wiel reported the name of the adapter as Marco Zucchini and all subsequent bibliographies have copied this information, which is unsupported.
It would appear from the present listing, however, that a Lucchini (probably Matteo, the name which appears in print for 1721/9) was actively
adapting works by Bassani for Venetian stages at this time.

 Corneille had in turn taken the basic outline from Las mocedades del Cid by Guillen de Castro y Bellvis.

1721/7

i

Op,

1721/8

im

Oo

1721/9

fa)
)

* Prince of Satriano.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 361

Plautilla Music by Antonio Pollarolo
[PLAUTILLA]

A dramma per musica Text by Vincenzo Cassani
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1721-11-22

Dedicated to Francesco Ravaschieri*

The plot concerned the succession to the imperial seat held by Septimus Severus [d. 211 AD]. It was
a condition of the emperor's will that his son Bassianus [= Caracalla] could succeed him only if he
married Plautilla. When the widow Julia Domna sent her other son, Geta [209-212], to fetch Plautilla
from Carthage, Bassianus fell in love with Marcia but tried to conceal his infidelity by accusing the
other couple of illicit relations. Plautilla was first performed on 22 November 1721 (A). Gaetano
Berenstadt (Bassiano) made his Venetian debut in this work, which included Antonio Bernacchi (Gera),
Vittoria Tesi (Giulia), and Francesca Cuzzoni (Plautilla). Marcia is never actually seen (or heard).
Arias in D-SW1

Listed as Bonlini 554; Groppo 558; Wiel 190; Alm 705

La fede ne' tradimenti Music attributed to Carlo Luigi Pietro Grua
{FAITH IN THE MIDST OF TREACHERY]

A dramma per musica Text by Girolamo Gigli*
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1721-11-26

Dedicated to Gaetana (Aurora) Sanseverino

The anonymous writer of the dedication of the libretto, which was revived from the work earlier given
at San Fantin (1705/7), praised the contributions of the dedicatee to the Arcadian academies, thus setting
a certain tone of expectation for the work itself. The subject came from well-worn but fictionalized
Spanish history featuring Fernando, the count of Castile; Sancho, the king of Navarre (who had died
before the story began); Garcia, the king's son; and Anagilda, the king's daughter.

La fede opened on 26 November 1721 (A), when it was received with universal satisfaction. A license
to print the libretto had been issued on the 13th. The text, previously used by G. Fabbrini (1689) and
by C. F. Pollarolo (Bologna, 1690; San Fantin, as above), Caldara (Rome, 1711, as Anagilda), and L.
A. Predieri (as La fede, Florence, 1718; as Anagilda, Turin, 1719), remained in circulation through
the 1750s.

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 553; Groppo 557; Wiel 193; Alm 704

L'amore per forza Music by Girolamo Bassani (1)
[To LOVE FROM NECESSITY] and Matteo Lucchini (2, 3)
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Bartolomeo Pavieri
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With a danza SORTING DATE: 1721-12-02
Without dedicatee

In this short account of the tale of Rinaldo (Chiara Orlandi) and Armide (Luigia Villanova), Tancred
(Carlo Pera) was supposed to distract Rinaldo from his madness but instead fell in love with Clorinda

The Palazzo Ravaschieri di Satriano (Naples) was the residence of Spanish viceroys in the late seventeenth century. It

was mentioned by Goethe in his Reise durch Italien im Jahre 1740.

48 With contributions

by Giuseppe Beretta, according to the catalogue of the Harvard University Libraries.

4 The duchess of Laurenzano was a patroness of music, poetry, and religious prose in Naples and a member of the Arcadian Society.

5 See the entry for 1705/7, which included two roles not retained here.

362

1721/10

1722/1

1722/2

V1

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

(Elisabetta Ottini), who attempted to free Rinaldo. L amore was first performed on 10 December 1721
(A). A license to print the libretto had been issued on 2 December 1721.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 555; Groppo 559; Wiel 199; Alm 706

Gl' eccessi della gelosia Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[THE EXCESSES OF JEALOUSY]

A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1721-12-27

Dedicated to Domenico Grillo, Nob. Gen.

The Roman army had reached the wall of Jerusalem, which was defended by the cruel tyrant Herod
Agrippa (Giovanni Paita) who zealously protected his wife, Mariane (Rosaura Mazzanti).' In this account
a portrait which Mariane had sent to Cleopatra precipitated much of the action. G/'eccessi was first
performed on 27 December 1721, when it was received with universal satisfaction (A, NV). A license
to print the libretto had been issued on 17 December 1721. The title-page was dated 1722. The work
was revived, with revisions by Giovanni Porta, as La Mariane at Sant' Angelo (1724/7). It was also
performed in Padua in the spring of 1733.

Arias in D-Hs; GB-Lbl; US-We (1722)

Listed as Bonlini 559; Groppo 563; Wiel 209; Alm 710

L'Ifide greca" Music attributed to Pietro Scarpari
[IPHIS, THE GREEK MAIDEN]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Nicolo Minato
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Lidia e Ircano and a ballo SORTING DATE: 1722-01-07
Without dedicatee

In this remake of La bugia regnante (1682/4), Iphis was raised as a boy in order to assure a line of
succession, but the day of reckoning came when s/he was declared to have reached adulthood. Luigia
Villanova sang in the title role, with Chiara Orlandi as her mother, Telesia, and Stefana Margherita
Perini as Klymene/Climene, who was supposed to marry her (him).** The production opened on 7
January 1722 (A, NV), the opening day of Carnival. A license to print the libretto had been issued on
8 November 1721; the title-page was dated 1722.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 556; Groppo 560; Wiel 207; Alm 707

Giulio Flavio Crispo" Music by Giovanni Maria Capelli**
[JULIUS FLAvIUS CRISPUS]

A tragedia da cantarsi (5) Text by Benedetto Pasqualigo
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1722-01-17

5! This Agrippa was otherwise known as Herod the Great, who murdered his wife.

* Sartori 8624. An undated libretto (Sartori 8623) signals an intermezzo of the same name (oder Wiirkungen der tibermdssigen Eifersucht'),
which was given at the Kartnertor (Vienna).

53 Scarpari (later called Dall'Oglio) was active in Venice as a teacher of singing and ornamentation at the Ospedali of both the Pieta and the
Derelitti. Several members of the family were string players. Domenico Dall'Oglio settled in Russia, where he composed several operas.

4 The staging was now much simpler and the number of roles smaller than in 1682. Telethusia has been renamed Telesia.

55 Capelli was maestro di cappella in the service of Antonio Farnese, Prince of Parma.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 363

& Dedicated to an anonymous Venetian senator
The story is taken from history of the fourth century AD, when Constantine, while guarding properties
in Gaul, took as his second wife Fausta, the daughter of Maximinus. Their son Constantine was opposed
by the hero Julius Flavius Crispus, a son of Constantine born to the British commoner Minervina.
Successful in battle, Flavius returned to discover that his brother had fallen in love with Arismene, the
daughter of his enemy Merentius, whom he has killed.

 This work was first performed on 17 January 1722 (A), when it was received with universal applause.'
A license to print the libretto had been issued on 20 December 1721 for 1722. The title-page is dated
1722. An innovation of the libretto (not followed in subsequent works) was that it indicated voice parts.
Antonio Bernacchi (contralto) sang in the title role with Gaetano Berenstadt (contralto; Flavio
Costantino), Vittoria Tesi (contralto; Fausta), and Francesca Cuzzoni (soprano; Arismene).* The
stellar machine of the production was a celestial globe showing the four principal parts of the world.

A Arias in CZ-Pk; D-B, Hs, WD; I-Re
Listed as Bonlini 557; Groppo 5 61; Wiel 204; Alm 708

.

1722/3 L'Argippo" Music by Giovanni Porta
[ARGYPPos]
A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1722-02-05~
& Dedicated to Marquis Carlo Filippo Pepoli'
o The cast of this revised version of San Cassiano's 1717/8 now included Andrea Costa (Tisifaro), Luigia

Villanova (Zanaida), Elisabetta Ottini (Silvero), and Carlo Pera (Argippo). The production was expected
to open between 31 January and 7 February 1722 (A). A license to print the libretto had been issued
on 24 January 1721 [M.V.] for 1722. The title-page was dated 1722.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 561; Groppo 565; Wiel 206; Alm 713

1722/4 L'innocenza difesa Music by Fortunato Chelleri
[INNOCENCE DEFENDED]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1722-02-07~
# Dedicated to Johann Theodor, Count PalatineTM*

This resetting of the text for Vinaccesi's L 'innocenza giustificata (1698/9) featured Giovanni Paita
(Lotario) and Rosaura Mazzanti (Giuditta). The role of Hedwig/ Edvige was eliminated and some of
the material was reordered.

Oo The opening was scheduled for the week 31 January-7 February 1722 (A). Allowing for the three-day
feast of Santa Maria Formosa, the earliest date for it would have been 3 February. The 7th is the most
likely date. A license to print the libretto was issued on 20 January 1721 M.V. for 1722. The title-page
is dated 1722. Chelleri's work was also given in W6lfenbiittel (1722, 1731) under the title Lotario (1729),

56 The remaining roles were for Giovanni Ossi (soprano; Clearco), Annibale Pio Fabbri (tenor; Costanzo), and Antonio Barbieri (tenor; Arsace).
5' The Pepoli were a noble family from Bologna.

58 The count was also the prince of Sulzbach and the brother of Elisabeth Christine, whose wedding to the prince of Piedmont was imminent.
The bride's progress in March 1722 drew several ranking Venetian nobles and musicians to the shores of Lake Garda (A).

* The dedicatee was expected to be in town only for a few days from 23 January. He had seen one opera before the end of January (NV).

 It was on that date that an agent for the groom appeared before the Collegio to announce the bride's progress (NV).

364 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

and, under the original title, in Vienna (1740).' Three arias from it were used in Handel's Lotario(HWV
26; 1729). Arias by Handel were mingled with material by Telemann to form the pastiche Judith,
Gemahlin Kdyser Ludewigs des Frommen, oder Die siegende Unschuld (Hamburg, 1733).

A Surviving partial score (Act 1, Kassel) in D-K1
Listed as Bonlini 558; Groppo 562; Wiel 210; Alm 709

1722/5 VenceslaoTM Music by Giovanni Porta (1),
[WENCESLAS] A. Pollarolo (2, 3), Gio. Maria Capelli (4, 5)
A dramma per musica (5) Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1722-02-07~
& Dedicated to Theodor Constantin Lubomirski

Venceslao contrasts the ill-tempered and dissolute Casimir (Antonio Bernacchi) with the gentle Alexander
(Gaetano Berenstadt), both sons of Wenceslas, the king of Poland (Antonio Barbieri). Their competition
for the affections of the royal princess Eirenike (Francesca Cuzzoni) resulted in the death of Alexander.
Oo This run, a partial revival of the work set by C. F. Pollarolo for the same theater (1703/4), opened
between 31 January and 7 February 1722 (A). A license to print the libretto had been issued on 20
January. This and the two preceding works all appear to have opened just after the closure for Santa
Maria Formosa. Their openings could have taken place in any order. All three runs would have been
curtailed by the approach of Lent. This pastiche version of Venceslao was revived as 1723/3.
A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 560; Groppo 564; Wiel 203; Alm 711, 712

1722/6 L'amor tirannico Music by Fortunato Chelleri (Acts 1, 2) and Gio. Porta (Act 3)
[TYRANNICAL LOVE]
A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
MM Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1722-05-13
a Dedicated to Karl-Albrecht, Prince, and Ferdinand, Duke, of Bavaria
oo This pastiche reduction of the five-act work set by Gasparini as 1710/6 featured Antonio Barbieri

(Tiridate), Anna Lorio (Polissena), Rosaura Mazzanti (Zenobia), and Antonio Pasi (Radamisto). A
model for Handel's Radamisto (HWV 12; London, 1720 et al.), this version of L amor was first performed
on 13 May 1722 (A). The last performance took place on the 28th (NV). A further revised version was
given in Ferrara in 1724. The first mention of the Florentine dance master Francesco Aquilanti, who

' See Sartori 13303, 13304, 13305 for the first, second, and fourth. The 1722 performance in Welfenbiittel (as Die beschiitzte Unschuld) honored
the name-day of Elisabeth Christine. The title also belonged to four works of poorly attributed authorship given in Verona (1714), Rome (1720),
and Florence (1721). A setting by Fiore (on a text different from the one used in Venice) was given in Turin in 1722. See Sartori 13298-13301.

 Strohm (Opernarien, ii, 158) notes that it may be related to a 1711 production in Milan (L innocenza difesa dai Numi), for which a score
exists in -MOe. There may be some confusion with P. Torri's /smene ovvero |'innocenza difesa dai numi, produced in Munich in 1715. He
notes that a 1732 production in Hamburg included some new recitatives and arias by Telemann. The libretto for Handel's Lotario was mainly
based on Salvi's for Adelaide (setting by Orlandini, San Cassiano, 1729).

 Prince of the Holy Roman Empire. Lubomirski's domain was in southern Poland, where the story is situated. The conclusion of the Swedish
wars of the early eighteenth century (heavily fought on Polish soil) may have made the story topical. Lubomirski was in Venice during the
first half of February and was entertained, with other imperial dignitaries, on 14 and 17 February. By the 21st he had left for Rome (NV).

 This adaptation omitted inter alia the dances that had enhanced the 1703 run.
 Probably nearer the latter, since Giulio Flavio Crispo had opened on 17 January.

 Acts | and 3 attributed to Chelleri, Act 2 to Porta in GO. All three acts are credited to Chelleri in NGDMM/2. The text had been set by Gasparini
in 1710/6.

7 The dedicatees had arrived two days before this opening (NV). Their visit was related to the conclusion of the marriage of the electoral prince
with the Emperor's niece, Maria Amalia.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 365

moved to San Giovanni Grisostomo in the autumn of 1723 and worked there through 1735, occurs in
this production.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 562; Groppo 566; Wiel 211; Alm 714

1722a Antigona. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1722/7 GP inganni felici Music by Giuseppe Maria Buini
[THE HAPPY DECEITS]
A dramma per musica Text revised from Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli  SORTING DATE: 1722-10-24
w Without dedicatee
Oo This revival was in rehearsal by 22 October 1722 (NV). It opened on the 24th (A). The text was reduced
from the ones previously set by C. F. Pollarolo (1695/5) and Alessandro Scarlatti (Naples, 1699).
A No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 563; Groppo 567; Wiel 205; Alm 715

1722/8 L'Arminio Music by Carlo Francesco Pollarolo
[ARMINIUS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Salvi
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1722-11-20
& Dedicated to Giacomo Valli, Noble of Genoa

Or  The Rhineland prince Arminius (Nicola Grimaldi) married Thrusnelda (Vittoria Tesi) but later fought
her father, Segestes (Francesco Guicciardi), the head of a trio of Roman legions, in the first century.
Although announced for the 7th, the first Venetian performance of L'Arminio was given on 14
November 1722 (A, NV). The libretto had been dedicated on the 1 0th. The work had earlier been given
in Pratolino. Sant' Angelo appeared to take its cues from San Giovanni Grisostomo in offering balli
of the nations and of arts and sciences. It seems likely, however, that this was done somewhat
satirically, since each ballo was to become slightly mad (impazzisco).

A Aria in D-ROu
Listed as Bonlini 564; Groppo 568; Wiel 208; Alm 716

1722/9 Romolo e Tazio Music by Carlo Luigi Pietro Grua
[ROMULUS AND TATIUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Vincenzo Cassani

MM Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1722-11-28

 The libretto noted that Buini was a member of the Accademia Filarmonica (of Bologna).

 It was rare at this time for libretti for San Moise to emphasize dance numbers, but here it is noted that the balli were choreographed by Monsieur
Andre Gall and Mademoiselle Jane Gall.

The expectation that the work [Les Heureuses tromperies] would open ala fin d' Octobre was reported in Le Mercure de France, Novembre
1722, p. 160.

7 It was noted in the libretto that Tacitus called Arminius the liberator of Germany.
 |-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 173, f. 565.

In 1701, with music attributed to Antonio Maria Bononcini, and in 1716, possibly with music by G. A. Perti (see R. L.and N. Weaver, Florentine
Theater, p. 229).

366 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

a Dedicated to Robert Walpole

Oo Inearly Rome, Romulus (Antonio Bernacchi), the first king of the Romans, noting an insufficient supply
of women, raided the nearby hills, kidnaped Sabine women, and took them to Rome, where they were
raped in the hope of generating a new population. After many battles, Romulus shared power with Tatius
(Antonio Baldi), the king of the Sabines. Romolo was first performed on 28 November 1722 (NV)
with much applause (A). The sacred oak, a favorite prop in San Giovanni Grisostomo's depictions
of Roman history, was featured in Act One. Military instruments accompanied the ordination of priests
in the same act, and the trumpets of battle were conspicuous in the final scene of Act Three.

A Arias in D-SWI
Listed as Bonlini 565; Groppo 569; Wiel 202; Alm 717

1722/10 Timocrate* Music by Leonardo Leo
[TIMOCRATES]
A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
i Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1722-12-26
& Dedicated to Johann Philipp Franz of Schenborn

In this round-robin plot, the Cretan king Timocrates (Nicola Grimaldi) was responsible for murdering
the son of the widow Ramira (Vittoria Tesi). Disguised as the warrior Klymenes, he attracted her amorous
interest. Maintaining his disguise, he also tried to court Ramira's daughter, Eriphyle/Erifile (Benedetta
Sorosina), who was officially engaged to Cresphontes (Francesco Guicciardi), Timocrates' rival.
 Timocrate was first performed, with applause, on 26 December 1722 (A); the title-page is dated 1723.
In the curtain-raising first scene, Timocrates emerged from a ship to face the edge of a horrid jungle
(a staple of Sant' Angelo scenery) as military instruments played.
A Aria, duet in D-MUs
Listed as Bonlini 566; Groppo 570; Wiel 218; Alm 718

1722/11 EumeneTM Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[EUMENES]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1722-12-27
& Without dedicatee
i) The story was based on 1697/7, set by M. A. Ziani. It was noted that the grand character of the hero

had been derived from Plutarch. This version opened with applause on 27 December 1722 (A); the
title-page is dated 1723. A license to print the libretto had been issued on the 22nd for 1723.

TM4 Walpole was the young son of the Chancellor of the British Exchequer. His father (also Robert; 1676-1743) was a prominent Whig politician.
Walpole's power was greatly increased with the ascent of George II (1727) and maintained through the support of Caroline of Ansbach (from
1727 Queen Caroline). He eventually became very unpopular with dramatists for imposing restrictions on London theaters (1737).

75 Also reported in Le Mercure galant, Dec. 1722, p. 147.
76 The 29th, which is reported as the opening day in the avviso, would have been the first Sunday of Advent.

7 Leo (1694-1744), trained in Naples, was from 1725 the first organist of the Chapel Royal there. Even as his first work was premiered in
Venice, he was beginning to experiment with musical comedy.

*8 The prince-bishop of Wiirzburg (1719-24) and duke of Franconia may have been in Venice to recruit musicians (and artists) to his Residenz,
on which construction had recently begun. Lalli wrote the texts for both a serenata and an oratorio given there in 1722. The celebrated
instrumentalist Gio. Battista Platti, a noted oboist and a recognized contributor to the early keyboard sonata, moved from Venice to Wiirzburg
in the same year. The locution principe...d' Erbipoli in the libretto refers to Herbapolis, the famous botanical garden established at Wirzburg
under the Schenborns. The Residenz was subsequently noted for its murals by Gio. Battista Tiepolo.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 367

fi Aria in D-SW1; GB-Lbl
Listed as Bonlini 567; Groppo 571; Wiel 217; Alm 719

1723/1 Mitridate, re di Ponto, Music by Giovanni Maria Capelli

vincitor di se stesso
[MITHRIDATES, KING OF PONTOS]

A dramma da cantarsi Text by Benedetto Pasqualigo

Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1723-01-05
wz Without dedicatee

The historical Mithridates (Antonio Bernacchi), the king of Pontos, was a staunch enemy of the Romans.
He invaded the Roman province of Asia (in what is now the southwest part of Turkey) but failed
to conquer it. Pharnakes (Antonio Baldi), his son by his first marriage, was conquered by Julius Caesar.
Xiphares/Sifarre (Antonio Pasi), his son by his second marriage, was put to death. Despite the continuing
war, Mithridates enjoyed a passionate caprice with Ismene (Marianna Laurenzani) on the island of
Ephesos. The story was said to have been derived from Plutarch via Racine.

OO Mitridate was first performed on 5 January 1723 (A). A license to print the libretto had been issued
on 26 December 1722. Although the avvisi (A) report that the work was greeted with universal applause
at its opening, the papal legate's notes (NV) indicate that a disgrace occurred on the same occasion
when a machine which was supposed to be moved prior to a balletto collapsed.*!

A Aria in D-B
Listed as Bonlini 568; Groppo 572; Wiel 213; Alm 720

1723/2 I veri amici Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[THE TRUE FRIENDS]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Francesco Silvani by Domenico Lalli
Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1723-01-25~
& Dedicated to Count Camillo Pola
 The text was essentially the same as that used in Paulati's setting for San Cassiano (1712/8). After

numerous performances (of what is presumed to have been Paulati's setting) on the Italian peninsula,
Albinoni reset the text for the wedding of the electoral prince Karl Albrecht and Maria Amalia of Austria
(Munich, 1722). The production had opened by 30 January 1723 (NV). Licenses to print the libretto
were issued on 7 January 1723 and 8 January 1722 [M.V.]. The libretto for Venice is dated 23 January
1723.

A Arias in GB-ObTM
Listed as Bonlini 569; Groppo 573; Wiel 219; Alm 721

 As Merindo Fesanio. Mithridates had been the subject of a tragedy in verse by Aurelio Cortellini in 1604 (cf. Riccoboni, Histoire, p. 121),
but the subject seems to have come into currency in Venice from Racine's tragedy.

* Like several of Pasqualigo's other librettos, a character description is given for each of the dramatis personae. Held to be a virtuous and
strong leader in some accounts, Mithridates is here described as ferocious, dissimulating, and jealous.

*! It did not cause serious injury or damage. The ballo at the end of Act Three was supposed to consist of danze baccanali with singing and
the playing of instruments.

 Count(also Fra) Pola was the named the Receiver of Malta in 1721. He officially participated in numerous Venetian civic ceremonies with
the doge and the French and Imperial ambassadors. His nephew Paolo Pola married Felicita , the daughter of Riolfo Colloredo, in 1724 (NV).

8 Groppo and Wiel both attribute this and the 1712 version to Andrea Paulati.

Arias by Leo in D-MUs are from the performance given in Munich in 1722.

368

1723/3

i"

fy
-

1723/4

im

&
OO

A

 1723a
1723/5

MM

i)
@

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Venceslao Music attributed to G. Porta, A. Pollarolo, and G. Capelli
[WENCECLAS]

A dramma per musica (5) Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1723-02-03~

Dedicated to Giuseppe Maria Pallavicino, Nob. Gen.

This pastiche version of Zeno's text (1703/4), recently given at San Giovanni Grisostomo as 1722/5,
probably opened after 30 January 1723 (NV), in which case its run would have been a short one
concentrated in Fat Week. A license to print the libretto had been issued on 20 January 1722 [M.V.].
The title-page is dated 1723. A version of the 1723 work made by Handel (HWV A4) was given at
the King's Theatre, London, in 1731.

Score in GB-Lbl

Listed as Bonlini 570; Groppo 574; Wiel 216; Alm 722

Bajazette Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini**
[BAYEZID]

A tragedia per musica Text attributed to Agostino Piovene
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1723-05-05

Dedicated to Joseph, Prince of Hesse-Darmstadt*

The proud Turkish sultan Bayezid (Giovanni Paita) was defeated by Tamerlane (Francesco Briganti)
at the end of the fourteenth century. This account emphasizes the humiliating servitude into which
Bayezid and his wife were put. As Zamerlano, Gasparini's work had been given at San Cassiano as
1711/3 and in Reggio (fair of 1719). There had been many other productions in northern Italy during
the intervening years. This revival opened on 5 May 1723 (A) with universal applause. The dedicatee
was in attendance (NV). To suit the work better to the theater, Piovene said, the work now ended
with the sultan's death.

Scores in A-Wn (Reggio, 1719);** D-MEIr (date uncertain); arias in D-SWI

Listed as Bonlini 571; Groppo 575; Wiel 220; Alm 723

L'amor furente. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

L'Ermengarda Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[HERMENGARD]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Anton Maria Lucchini
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Summer (Assumption)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1723-10-10
Without dedicatee

In this character plot (loosely a sequel to 1669/4), Hermengard, the widow of Adalbert, had become
the queen of Italy. She now sought to protect the interests of her step-son, Berengar, and her son, Anscar,
against the assaults of Rudolph, the king of Borgogne. The action was set in Pavia (here renamed

*5 There is no dedication in some copies of the libretto.
86 With arias by Domenico Fabris (Groppo MS, p. 265).

7 The son of Landgrave Philip, Joseph (b. 1699) was involved as a youth in musical and theatrical affairs in the Mantuan court in the first
years of his father's tenure as its imperial governor. See Cataldi's writings of 1987 and 1988.

88 Facs. edn. in IOB, 24.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 369

Ticino). Ermengarda was first performed on 10 (A) October 1723. A license to print the libretto
had been issued on 2 October 1723.

A Aria in I-CF
Listed as Bonlini 572; Groppo 576; Wiel 214; Alm 724

1723/6 Gli equivoci d'amore e d'innocenza Music by Francesco Gasparini
[THE MISUNDERSTANDING BETWEEN LOVE AND INNOCENCE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Salvi!
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1723-11-20
Pa Dedicated to Giuseppe Maria Pallavicino, Nob. Gen.
O@ Leonora, the queen of Aragon, was given three choices for a possible husband. Her initial choice 

the army general Carlos Sanchez  caused enormous envy between his rivals, Ramirez and Ernesto.
Because the innocence and honesty of her love were demonstrated, the marriage proceeded. The first
Venetian performance of Gli equivoci, given on 24 November 1723 (A), was received with universal
applause. A license to print the libretto had been issued on the 10th. Faustina Bordoni made her first
public appearance in Venice in several years as Leonora. Joining her were Antonio Bernacchi (Sanchez),
Bartolomeo Bartoli (Ramirez), and Antonio Baldi (Ernesto).
A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 574; Groppo 578; Wiel 212; Alm 726

1723/7 Armida abbandonata Music by Giuseppe Maria Buini
[ARMIDE ABANDONED]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1723-11-27
a Without dedicatee

In this episode inspired by Tasso's Gerusalemme liberata, the focus is on Rinaldo's magnanimous
flight from the charms of Armide. The location has been changed from the Fortunate Isles to Armide's
enchanted palace near Geoffrey's encampment, which is on a beach. Tancred is imprisoned there.
A ghost of Clorinda appears as an Amazon but does not sing. Some of the principal actions have been
assigned to characters other than those portrayed in Tasso's original.

@< & This version of Armida was first performed on 27 November 1723 (A) with applause. Anna Maria
Mangani sang in the title role with Giovanni Reina (Rinaldo) and Gio. Andrea Tassi (Zancredi). The
magic of Philomachus is depicted in the opening scene in his grotto. In the enchanted-forest scene in
Act Two, Rinaldo is held captive in a giant cypress, from which the ghost of Clorinda also appears.
Silvani's text had been used in Ruggieri's work (1707/9). Buini had earlier recounted the story in
productions at the Teatro Formigliari (Bologna, 1716) and as Armida delusa (1720/3). Some of the
sets in this production may have been recycled from L amore per forza (1721/9).

 This account is substantially less militaristic than Dolfin's, set by Sartorio as 1669/4, Today the Ticino is an Italian-speaking canton in
southeastern Switzerland. Legend holds that Berengar was an ancestor of the House of Sulzbach.

 Le Mercure galant, Nov. 1723, p. 968, suggests the opening date was the 17th, but the relevant avviso, attesting to the universal applause
with which the work was received, was written on the 16th.

' With debts to Silvani's // miglior d'ogni amore per il peggior d'ogni odio (1703/8; cf. Strohm, Opernarien, ii, 168). The tones of the two
works are strikingly different, however.

 Confirmed in Le Mercure galant, Dec. 1723, pp. 1216-7.

 Bonlini claimed that the text was little changed from Ruggieri's setting for Sant' Angelo in 1707, but without an extant full score, this cannot
be confirmed.

370

1723/8

1724/1

8

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 573; Groppo 577; Wiel 215; Alm 725

Il pid fedel fra gli amici Music by Michel Angelo Gasparini
[THE MOST FAITHFUL OF ALL THE FRIENDS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Battista Guizzardi
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With ballo SORTING DATE: 1723-12-26

Dedicated to Camillo Borghese and Agnese ColonnaTM

The plot is loosely related to the campaign of Brennus (Gio. Battista Pinacci) in Ephesos (the ostensible
subject of 1690/1) but is mostly fictional. The victorious king has offered to sacrifice his sister Dori
(Maria Teresa Cotti) to the goddess Diana, but his plans have been thwarted because Prince Ormond
has fallen in love with Dori. The work was first performed on 26 December 1723 (A), when it was
received with universal applause. A license to print the libretto had been issued on 16 December 1723.
Score in D-ROu (seconda)

Listed as Bonlini 575; Groppo 579; Wiel 224; Alm 727

Gli sforzi d'ambizione e d'amore Music by Giovanni Porta
[THE EFFORTS OF AMBITION AND LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Anton Maria Lucchini
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1724-01-05

Without dedicatee

In this fictional tale, Abanrides murdered the king Klyneas/Clinea, married his widow Nicaea (Anna
Maria Mangani), and was then himself killed. Nicaea was attracted to the young Aletes (Bartolmeo
Straparapa), who was actually the princess Kyllene/Cilene (Francoise Le Brett), her son's mistress,
in disguise. Meanwhile, Pharnakes (Gaetano Pinetti), Nicaea's prime minister, disguised his own son,
the true Aletes, as Nicaea's son, Aratos (Gio. Antonio Reina), in the hope that he would succeed to
the throne.

Gli sforzi was first performed on 5 January 1724 (A, NV), when it was received with universal applause
(A). It was still running on 8 February, when the Dutch merchant Jan Alensoon found the music to be
reasonably good but the singers, excepting the Florentine Mangani, mediocre.* Alensoon was himself
described in a caricature by Pier Leone Ghezzi (30 May 1724) as a Dutchman who travels the earth
to find...singers and instrumentalists to [teach him]...to sing well....His voice is so frightening it makes
people laugh; he sings bass and falsetto at the same time.*

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 576; Groppo 580; Wiel 228; Alm 728



* The dedicatees were wed at the start of November in Loreto and then spent four months in Venice. Camillo Borghese was the son of the
interim (1721-22) viceroy of Naples, Marc' Antonio Borghese.

5 Bonlini's claim (Le glorie, p. 194) that the plot was indebted to Morselli's for Amulio e Numitore (1689/1) seems unfounded. Nor is it
significantly related to Arcoleo's for Brenno in Effeso (1690/1), even though the setting is not unrelated.

6 Le Mercure galant, Janvier 1724, pp. 121f.

 Vlaardingerbroek, Alensoon, p. 546. The author has kindly supplied the full text in Dutch: ...Opera van San Moise, zijnde een klijn dog
niet onaardig theatertje, alwaar vertoont wierd een stuk genaamt Li sforzi d'ambitione ed amore, zijnde de musiecq van Giovanni Porta, vrij
goed, maar de acteurs waaren niet veel bysonders, de beste was Anna [Maria] Mangani da Firenza; hier sag ik alle menschen gemaskerd.

8]-Rvat, Ottoboni Latino 3115, n. 3115, f. 89: Monsieur d' Alenson olandese, il quale gira il mondo p[er] trovare, e sentire catarine, e musici
pler] imparar...cantar bene et il med[esim]o a ua voce spavata che fa...risa e canta in basso et in falsetto nel med[esim]o tempo....

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 371

1724/2 Ipermestra Music by Geminiano Giacomelli
[HYPERMNESTRA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Salvi!
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1724-02-05
& Without dedicatee

The Egyptian prince Danaos (Gio. Battista Pinazzi), who had 50 daughters, sailed to Argos after a dispute
with his brother Aigyptos/Egito, who had 50 sons. While there he was told by an oracle that in his absence
his nephews would usurp the throne. He advocated that his daughters should wed their cousins
simultaneously and then stab their husbands on their wedding night. All the daughters obeyed except
Hypermnestra (Faustina Bordoni), who spared her cousin, the argonaut Lynceus (Antonio Bernacchi),
on account of his kindness.'"

ros1@) The first Venetian performance of Jpermestra was given on 5 February 1724 (A, NV). Alensoon, who
heard this work performed on 10 February, found the music difficult and the scenery inappropriate
but he praised the singers. He described Faustina Bordoni (/permestra) as the greatest singer then known,
Antonio Bernacchi (Linceo) as a high alto (hoogen alt) castrato, Bartolomeo Bartoli (Nicandro) as
a beautiful high soprano (schoone hooge Cant), and Gio. Battista Pinazzi (Danao) as a beautiful
(fraje) tenor.' Alensoon attended further performances on February 12, 17, 18, 20, 24, and 26.

a) The merchant also found many opportunities to meet Faustina Bordoni in private. These included a
concert at the home of Heer Molesworth, the English envoy to Turin, on the 11th; on the Grand Canal,
in the company of her singing teacher, Michel Angelo Gasparini, on the 14th; at her lodgings, on March
2nd; and in undetermined circumstances on March 7th.

- Salvi's text was set subsequently by several other Italian composers including Vivaldi (Florence, 1727).
Giacomelli's setting is said to have first been performed (at the Teatro Ducale, Parma) when the composer
was only eighteen years old [c. 1710], but no libretto survives.' A revival was given in Pesaro in 1733.

fi Arias in D-ROu
Listed as Bonlini 577; Groppo 581; Wiel 223; Alm 729

1724/3 Antigono, tutore di Filippo, Music by Tomaso Albinoni (1-4),
re della Macedonia Giovanni Porta (5)
[ANTIGONOS, TUTOR OF PHILIP, KING OF MACEDONIA]
A tragedia da cantarsi (5) Text by Giovanni Piazzon
M1 Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a prologue and an intermedio'TM SORTING DATE: 1724-02-15
a Without dedicatee

 Giacomelli (c. 1692-1740) wrote one of the congratulatory letters printed in Vol. 7 of Marcello's Estro poetico-armonico (settings of vernacular
paraphrases of the first 50 Psalms of David; Venice, 8 vols., 1724-26). The letter is dated Piacenza, 29 April 1726. Giacomelli completed his
musical studies with Alessandro Scarlatti in Naples and was long active in Parma and Piacenza.

' With apparent debts to Ivanovich's text for Partenio's La costanza trionfante (1672/5 ).
'! The story was enacted privately as a festa teatrale many times over in seventeenth-century Florence.

' V laardingerbroek, Alensoon, p. 546. The author has kindly supplied the full text in Dutch: San Giovanni Grisostomo, alhier is het theater
vrij groot maar soo groot niet als te Milano; eenige Theaters [scenes] waaren seer fraaij, eenige met fauten die vrij grof waaren: de opera heette
Ipermestra (zijnde Hypermnestra); de musiecq was seer schoon en heerlijk, dog kunstig en seer moejelijk, zijnde gecomponeert door Signor
Giminiano Jacomelli, Capelmeester van den Hertog van Parma. de sangers en sangeressen waaren alle goed, zijnde de voornaamste, la signora
Faustina Bordoni, die gesegt word de grootste sangster te zijn die bekent is, il signor Antonio Bernachi, Bartolomeo Bartoli, en Gio: Batt:
Pinazzi; Faustina singt een schoone Cant, Bernachi zijnde een castraat een hoogen alt, Bartoli een castraat een schoone hooge Cant, en Pinazzi
een fraje Tenor. He notes that Bartoli is not mentioned in Wiel's account of the work. My thanks to Frans Wiering for help with the translations.

'3 Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 624) indicates that Cavalli had set Moniglia's Jpermestra for performance in Florence in 1658.

' Kirkendale (Principiate, p. 477) says that the intermezzi La donna nobile were given with the second performance and these plus // marito
giocatore with the third.

372

2

1724/4

m1

fz)
7 OO

A

 1724a
 1724b
 1724c

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Upon the encouragement of the newly widowed Phythia/Fizia (Anna Maria Mangani), Antigonos
(Gaetano Pinetti), a duplicitous nobleman, was about to be crowned king of Macedonia when it is
discovered that the late king Demetrios had a surviving son, Philip (Gio. Antonio Reina). Philip, who
had been tutored by Socrates and Zeno, was now disguised, for reasons of security, as Amyntas/Aminta.
Although the outline of the text is attributed to Polybius and Plutarch, the unsigned argomento in the
libretto lamented that this version of the tragedy was written only as an entertainment, which is presently
adapted to the musical theater with the customary repugnant accommodations to that situation.!
Antigono opened on 15 February 1724 (NV). Alensoon, who attended a performance on the 19th, reported
that the work was completed by Porta after Albinoni was reported to be mortally ill.' According to
the merchant's report, Porta served as harpsichordist; Anna Maria Mangani was an artistic first lady.
Alensoon attended another performance of the work on the 27th.'

Aria in D-ROu

Listed as Bonlini 578; Groppo 582; Wiel 229; Alm 730

Scipione nelle Spagne Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[SCIPIO IN SPAIN]

A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1724-05-17
Without dedicatee

Zeno's libretto, previously set by Caldara for performance in Vienna in 1722, took as its background
the Roman conquest, under Scipio Africanus the Elder, of the Carthaginians in Spain. Scipio (Gio. Battista
Minelli) was captivated by the slave Sophonisba (Marianna Laurenzani), who was the daughter of the
captain of the Carthaginian forces. This version was significantly reduced to suit the limited scope of
Ascension operas. Scipione opened on 24 May (NV), the eve of Ascension, with universal applause
and ran for eighteen days (A) with good reviews and the attendance of many foreign visitors (NV).
A license to print the libretto had been issued on the 17th. Scarlatti's setting had been given in Naples
in the winter of 1713-14.'%

Arias in F-Pn

Listed as Bonlini 579; Groppo 583; Wiel 230; Alm 731

Concerto de' suoni. Cf. Suppl. Sa.
I tre voti. Cf. Suppl. Sa.

Le nozze di Fauno e di Dorinda. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

'05 | ful...la seguente tragedia per solo divertimento, quale resta presentemente accomodata al teatro di musica col concertare al posibile le
solite ripugnanze del teatro di musica &c.

'6 This was a false alarm.

' Vlaardingerbroeck, Alensoon, p. 547. The author kindly provides this transcript of the original document:

we

's avonds in de opera van

San Moise geweest, alwaar vertoont wierd een opera van Antigono, zijnde vier actens gecomponeert door Tomaso Albinoni, die dood-krank
wierd, en de vijfde acte door Gio: Porta, die de clavecimbel speelde. De laatste acte wierd door de Mangani, zijnde de eerste actrice van deese
opera, seer kunstig uijtgevoerd.

'8 See Griffin Doc. 284, citing a Roman performance on 21 January 1713, and Doc. 310, citing a Neapolitan performance on 30 January 1714.

1724/5

O@GE

A

 1724d
 1724e

1724/6

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 373

Laodice Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[LAODIKE]

A dramma per musica (5) Text attributed to Angelo Schietti
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Li servi di corte SORTING DATE: 1724-10-14
Without dedicatee

After conquering the Scythians, Mithridates occupied Cappadocia and almost all of Greece. In this
improvisation on history, when he returned to his realm he found it in disarray. His sister and wife,
Laodike, had given birth to a son who was not his. This encouraged Gordias, the captain of his guard,
to scheme to overthrow Mithridates. Elements of the story resonate with those of Frigimelica-Roberti's
Mitridate Eupatore (1707/3) and Zeno's Mitridate (1729/12).

Laodice was first performed on 14 October 1724 (NV). A license to print the libretto had been issued
on 7 October 1724. The work (an unusually ambitious one for San Moise) was received with universal
applause (A) and was still running on 11 November. Anna Tessieri (nicknamed La Gird), then aged
fourteen, made her Venetian debut as Kleisthenes/Clistene.' Another Mantuan, Chiara Orlandi, sang
in the title role, with Angelo Maria Cantelli (Mitridate) and Felice Novelli (Gordio). The Mauro brothers
 Sebastiano, Antonio, and Gasparo had rented the theater from Almor6 Giustinian in July, apparently
for 400 ducats a year.'' Laodice and II nemico amante became the subjects of litigation brought by
the impresario Antonio Gaspari.'"

Arias in I-CF

Listed as Bonlini 580; Groppo 584; Wiel 226; Alm 732

Il nome glorioso in terra, santificato in cielo. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Armida al campo. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Antigona Music by Giuseppe Maria Orlandini
[ANTIGONE]

A tragedia (5) Text by Benedetto Pasqualigo
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Con la burla da dovero; changed to Despina e Niso'? SORTING DATE: 1724-11-07

Without dedicatee

This fully staged version of 1721/1 opened on 7 November 1724 (A, NV; Le Mercure galant, Dec. 1724,
p. 264), which was also the date on which a license to print the libretto was granted. Despite its having
been a production concocted in haste and based on a fourth edition of the libretto, Antigona was received
with universal applause (A). The cast included Lucia Lanzetta in the title role, with Teresa Peruzzi
(La Denzia; Giocasta) and Nicola Grimaldi (Osmene).

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 581; Groppo 585; Wiel 221; Alm 733

' Gird, who had appeared as Mirtillo in La ninfa infelice (Treviso, 1723), was soon to become a frequent performer in Vivaldi's operas. Vio
(Albinoni, p. 120) suggests that she may have been one of Albinoni's many singing pupils by 1722. She had been born in Mantua in 1710.
She, her mother, and her sister were resident in Venice by June 1725 (Vio, Gird, p. 28).

"0 ].Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Fr. Biondi, Busta 1939, item of 29 Luglio 1724. Gasparo was a brother-in-law of Sebastiano and Antonio.
Persons using the surname Mauro had been involved with stage scenery since the mid-seventeenth century.

"Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti P. P. de Bonis, Busta 1732, item by date. Gaspari had made his debut at Sant' Angelo in 1712/6. He was described
as a priest when he was admitted to the ducal cappella as a soprano on 22 December 1726 (I-Vas, PS, Busta 153, f. 78v). Just before Christmas
1728 he requested permission to spend the next six months in Brussels (/oc. cit., f. 109r).

"? Cited in Groppo MS, p. 200, and Bonlini MS.

374 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1724/7 La Mariane Music adapted from Tomaso Albinoni by Giovanni Porta
[MARIANE]
A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1724-11-16~
& Dedicated to Theodor Constantin Lubomirski!"?
 This revised version of Albinoni's Gl eccessi della gelosia (1721/10) opened on 16 (Le Mercure galant,

Dec. 1724, p. 2870f) or 18 (A) November 1724. The libretto was dedicated on the 15th. The principal
singers were the same as in the earlier production. Giovanni Carestini made his Venetian debut in a
supporting role (Oftaviano). The Mercure described the work as an almost believable characterization
(une invention presque semblable).

fi Arias in D-SHs; F-Pc; GB-Cfm
Listed as Bonlini 582; Groppo 586; Wiel 225; Alm 734

1724/8 Il trionfo della virti Music by Gio. Francesco Brusa'!*
[THE TRIUMPH OF VIRTUE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Pietro d'Averara
MM Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1724-11-18
& Dedicated to Marco Contarini, Nob. Ven.'!%

The conflict that pitted the Roman citizen Sulla against Marius, the leader of the plebes, produced a
strange outcome: after accruing more and more power to himself, Sulla suddenly declared a truce with
his enemy. The motivation was Sulla's aspiration to enable his son Elius Faustus to wed Alba Cornelia
in the face of a condition sought by the prospective bride's father, Titus Scipio, that Sulla restore the
tules of government of the Republic. D' Averara's eight roles were reduced to six to suit the needs
of the theater.!"

 8 II trionfo was first performed on 18 November 1724 (A, NV). Given that La Mariane was running
concurrently, // trionfo is probably the unnamed work said in the Mercure'"' to have represented the
subject...most in vogue in recent years (/e sujet.../e plus en vogue dans ces dernieres annees). At the
same time, it appears to have been the first opera...last winter at San Giovanni Grisostomo, which
Owen Swiney found intollerable.!'* Antonio Barbieri sang in the role of Sulla, with Carlo Scalzi (Elio),
Faustina Bordoni (Cornelia), and Gio. Carlo Bernardi (Tito Scipione).

"The Venetian Brusa (1700-68) had a spotty career as an opera composer. Apart from a short series of works initiated by the present production,
he composed only another short series in the mid-1750s. He was described as a professore di musica when, in 1726, he was engaged at San
Marco to play the organetto a basso (I-Vas, PS, Busta 153, fr. 79v).

"'5 Apparently the son of the procurator who assembled the Contarini Codices. He was a friend of Marco Miani.

"6 Generic titles such as this one attributed to librettists who were working 40 years earlier usually suggest a rifacimento. While earlier models
for this work cannot be identified, the title had long been associated with court spectacles. Prior uses of it are linked to a festa d'armi (Modena,
1660); to wedding serenatas for both Dorothea Sophia of Neuburg (Parma, 1693) and King Joao V of Portugal (Lisbon, 1720); and to a festa
teatrale involving Faustina Bordoni for the Palatine Electress (Florence, 1719), who was a long-time protectress of the singer. Given the nature
of the plot, the text could certainly have had a hidden meaning.

" Dec, 1724, p. 2870.

"'8 Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 355, quoting Swiney's letter of 11 May 1725. After a brief career as a translator and impresario in London,
Swiney (then called MacSwiney) disappeared in January 1713, after two performances of Handel's Teseo, leaving the singers, scenery-builders,
and costume-makers unpaid. His name was held in ignominy thereafter in England.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 375

ILLUSTRATION 17. Portraits of (left) Francesco Bernardi (Senesino) by Thomas Hudson and (right) Faustina Bordoni, by
Rosalba Carriera, both from John Hawkins' Science and Practice of Music, iii (London, 1776). (Private collection, used by

permission.)

fi

1724/9



Arias in D-SHs; I-Vnm (prima)!
Listed as Bonlini 583; Groppo 587; Wiel 222; Alm 735

Tl nemico amanteTMTM Music attributed to Fortunato Chelleri
[THE INIMICAL LOVER] and Giuseppe Maria Buini
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Angelo Schietti
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With Li servi di corte SORTING DATE: 1724-12-09~

Dedicated to Gio. Battista Fagia'?!

This variant of La pace per amore (1719/9) concerned the political conflict between Arsakes (who never
appears) and Adrastos (Felice Novello), heightened by the vacillating amorous intentions of the latter
towards Idalma (Anna Gir) and Berenice (Stella Fortunata Cantelli). The denouement employed as
its device the revelation of a mistaken identity. The work opened in the opulent temple of Osiris, where
the Persian prince Klymenes (alias Florio; the role was taken by the impresario Antonio Gaspari) abducted
Idalma on the beach at Tyre.

This production of this second opera opened between 9 and 16 December 1724 (A); the title-page
was dated 1724. Gaspari served as the impresario at San Moise throughout the autumn and winter seasons
of 1724-25, according to notarized papers filed by two members of current San Moise casts  Stella
Fortunata and her father, Angelo Maria Cantelli (Lucrino)  concerning II nemico amante and Laodice
(1724/5).' Stella Cantelli was apparently unhappy with her role. On some evenings when she and
her father failed to appear, the musicians who were present sang their arias.'?

"9 Alternative arias by Galuppi are in B-Bc (Wiesend, Galuppi, p. 234).

'2 Schietti's own title for the work, given at the end of the argomento, was L'inimico amante.

"1 A Brescian.

'22 Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti P. P. de Bonis, Busta 1732, entry of 30 Gennaro 1724 [M.V.].

"3 A more detailed account of Gaspari's complaints is given with the final work of the 1724-25 season, Gli sdegni cangiati (1725/4).

376 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

fi No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 592; Groppo 596; Wiel 227; Alm 743

1724/10 _Ifigenia in Tauride Music by Leonardo Vinei!TM
[IPHIGENEIA IN THE TAURIS]
A tragedia variata ad uso di cantarsi (5) Text by Benedetto Pasqualigo
rd Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1724-12-26
wz Without dedicatee

OO Pasqualigo's text had been set five years earlier by Orlandini (1719/3). A frontispiece (one of the rare
few of the time) in the libretto advertises, in banners held by putti, that the story was based on a tragedy
by Sophocles. A lengthy note to uditori (hearers, as opposed to readers [ /ettori]) includes an Italian
translation of Ovid's third elegy describing the action. Vinci's setting of figenia opened on 26 December
1724 (A). A license to print the libretto had been issued on the 17th. Faustina Bordoni again sang in
the title role, now with Carlo Scalzi as Orestes. Because he was in Venice for rehearsals by 5 December,
Vinci missed the opening of his opera Le zite gnalera in Naples.'* Musical excerpts from /figenia were
used in Handel's pastiche Elpidia (HWV A1), which had its London premiere on 11 May 1725.

fi Arias in D-MUs, SWI; GB-Lbl; I-Vnm (seconda)

Listed as Bonlini 584; Groppo 588; Wiel 235; Alm 736

1724/11 Seleuco Music by Giovanni Zuccari
[SELEUKOS]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1724-12-26
& Dedicated to the Prince of Avellino'*
oo The original version of the text had been given under the title Antioco (1705/6) with music by Francesco

Gasparini. It concerned changing alliances between Syria, Macedonia, and Lydia.'?' Seleuco was first
performed on 26 December 1724 (A); the title-page was dated 1725. Giovanni Paita appeared in the
title role with Giovanni Carestini (Antioco), Giovanni Raina (Jolomeo), and Rosaura Mazzanti
(Stratonica). The dedication was signed by the violinists Giovanni Battista and Antonio Madonis.'*

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 585; Groppo 589; Wiel 237; Alm 737

'4 The Sicilian composer (c. 1696-1730) was, despite the brevity of his life, a prime mover in the world of comic opera. In 1725 he had succeeded
Alessandro Scarlatti at the Chapel Royal in Naples. In 1729-30 he served as impresario at the Teatro delle Dame, Rome.

5 Griffin Doc. 528.

'6Not identified by name. The most likely candidate would be Francesco Marino (II) Caraccioli (1688-1727), although nothing in the libretto
excludes the possibility that it was his younger brother, Ambrogio (1699-1746).

"7 The subject of Seleukos had been treated in Minato's text 1666/4.

"8 The Madonis were highly acclaimed violinists. Their mention here suggests the absence of Vivaldi. All three violinists had connections
with the troupe of Antonio Denzio, which appeared both at San Moise and at the theater of the Bohemian count Frantisek Antonin von Sportk
in Kuks (Prague). The Madonis migrated to the troupe of A. M. Peruzzi. On Gerolama Valsecchi Madonis, see 1726/4.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 377

1724/12 La Didone abbandonata* Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[DIDO ABANDONED]
A tragedia per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio'
im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With Brunetta e Barilotto' SORTING DATE: 1724-12-26
a Without dedicatee

In Virgil's familiar account, Aeneas was captivated by Dido, the founder and queen of Carthage. Although
she reciprocated his love, he felt compelled by duty to sail for Italy. Abandoned, she cursed the Trojan
cause and threw herself on a funeral pyre.

oo This production of Didone, the first in Venice based on a text by Metastasio, opened on 26 December
1724 (A).'" Its very great success in Venice, Florence and Milan was reported in the Mercure galant.'
Groppo added an uncharacteristic note of praise.'*? Marianna Benti Bulgarelli (La Romanina) was
cast as the tragic heroine, with Nicola Grimaldi as Aeneas. The same principals appeared in a production
in Reggio in the spring of 1725.'** Giovanni Orsato, whose previous services to Sant' Angelo are heavily
satirized in Marcello's // teatro alla moda (1720), served as impresario at San Cassiano in 1724-25.

 Recent discoveries by Miggiani suggest that the heroine was promised 2,400 for the season at San
Cassiano. Her fee was to be paid in three installments, but only the first was provided punctually. She
therefore threatened to quit the production. Her grievances were publicized ina satirical work, L opera
in commedia, published without date in Amsterdam.'*

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 587; Groppo 591; Wiel 232'%

1724/13 Agide, re di Sparta* Music by Giovanni Porta
[AGIS, KING OF SPARTA]
A dramma per musica Text by Luisa Bergalli'
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With Lisetta e Astrobolo SORTING DATE: 1724-12-26
x Dedicated to Antonio Rambaldo'*

" Bom Pietro Trapassi (1698-1782) to Neapolitan parents of modest means, he was taken under wing by Pietro Ottoboni, who was his godfather.
His appointment in Vienna (1729) stimulated him to achieve new heights in his writing.

' Or La capricciosa e il credulo (cited by Groppo, MS, p. 591). Wiel (Teatri, p. 75) indicates that the intermezzi entitled L 'impresario delle
canarie (Dorina e Nibbio) were performed with this work.

'5! Domenico Sarri's setting had been given in Naples during the preceding February. It was to be given again in Venice as 1730/11.
'? Le Mercure galant, Avril 1725, p. 800.

'3 Pieno di tutte le grazie drammatiche questo autore, conobbe a uso tutti i vantaggi migliori del teatro esaurindo con arte, e con prudenza
la materia particolarment d'amore, per cui, e per il grazioso suo stile riesce la delizia del nostro teatro (Groppo, Catalogo, p. 120).

'4 Metastasio was living in the Bulgarellis' home when he wrote the text for Didone. The music for the Reggio production was said to be
by Porpora (see Fabbri and Verti, Due secoli, p. 57).

'5 Details forthcoming in Maria Giovanna Miggiani, La Romanina. Cf. Suppl. 3b, 1726.
'6 The libretto for this work is notably absent from the collection in US-LAu and therefore from the Alm catalogue.

'57 Bergalli was an accomplished poet and essayist who was increasingly respected for her learning and Arcadian tastes. She later married
Gasparo Gozzi and was a major force in the Venetian literary scene throughout the middle decades of the century.

'358 Count of Collalto. In an obsequious dedication, the librettist cites the antiquity of his lineage as well as the merits of the Emperor Charles
VI, the rise of the literary republic based on the principles of the Arcadians of Rome and the Accademia della Crusca in Florence, and the
sublime discernment of the dramas of Apostolo Zeno. She notes that the poet Gaspara Stampa based one of her works on the famous Collaltino.
Rambaldo's involvement with San Moise at this juncture is noteworthy, because the Denzio troupe had shuttled back and forth between San
Moise and Bohemia (the count's home territory) since 1716. For further information on Venetian musicians in Bohemia see Freeman, Sporck'
and Bentheim/Stegemann, Vivaldi.

378

fi

 1724f
 1724g
 1724h

1725/1

i

1725/2

MM

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

The early Spartan king Agis (Angelo Maria Cantelli) offered valuable gifts to whomever could bring
him the head of Cassandrus, king of the Macedonians.' Agide was first performed on 26 December
1724 (A). The title-page was dated 1725. Bonlini obliquely related the appearance of a female librettist
to the popularity of Vivaldi's concerto collection L 'estro armonico (Op. 8, 1725), perhaps because of
Vivaldi's association with the Ospedale della Pieta, where the performers were all female.'*!

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 586; Groppo 590; Wiel 240; Alm 738

Bacco usurpatore del Parnasso. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
Rutzvanscad il giovine. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Mintidaspe il vecchio. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Berenice' Music by Giuseppe Maria Orlandini
[BERENICE]

A dramma da cantarsi Text by Benedetto Pasqualigo'
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1725-01-20
Without dedicatee

The aspirations of the young Palestinian queen Berenice (Faustina Bordoni) and the powerful Roman
conqueror Titus (Carlo Scalzi) were threatened by the plan of Titus's father, Vespasian, to see his son
married to the noble Roman virgin Lavinia (Antonia Merighi). In a series of conflicts between love
and duty, Berenice, after following Titus to Rome, returned to her homeland. After his father died, the
Senate insisted upon Titus's marriage to Lavinia. To facilitate the marriage, Domitian (Gio. Carlo
Bernardi) persuaded the senators to declare Berenice an honorary citizen. In a show of virtue, she declared
Titus free to marry whom he must. To rise to the same moral level, Titus renounced marriage altogether.
Lavinia then married Domitian, who succeeded Titus as emperor [81-96 AD].

Berenice opened on 20 January 1725 (NV). The title-page indication for inverno 1726 appears to
be completely in error. Among unusual elements of the staging, the third act opened in a picture-gallery;
the River Tiber was seen in the finale; and one of the dances featured barbarian instruments (strumenti
barbareschi). Despite its ambitions, Berenice had a short run. Musical excerpts from Berenice were
used in Handel's pastiche Elpidia (HWV A1), which had its London premiere on 11 May 1725.
Score in B-Be; arias in B-Le; GB-Lgc, Ob; I-Vnm

Listed as Bonlini 588; Groppo 592; Wiel 233; Alm 739

Ulisse Music by Giovanni Porta
[ULyssEs]

A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1725-01-29~

' Despite the involvement of the famous Neapolitan composer Porta, the cast members were from Mantua, Modena, and Venice.

4 In the cases of Agide and the two works listed immediately before it (Seleuco and La Didone), the rapportista Alvisi gives December 26
as the opening date, while Donado gives the impression that these works all opened between the 27th and the 29th.

'4|Ora che l'estro poetico incomincia in Venezia ad infiammare le donne ancora, non sara pili sola |'antica frecia a vantar la sua Saffo (Bonlini,
Le glorie, p. 197). The reference suggests that L 'estro armonico was already in circulation.

' Based on Racine's Berenice (1670).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 379

& Dedicated to Nicold del Tocco, Duke of Sicignano'?

i) Based on the fourteenth book of Homer's Odyssey,'* this libretto concentrated on Ulysses' return to
Ithaca. Not wishing to be recognized by his enemies, he posed as a follower of Ulysses and participated
as a singing virtuoso (virtuoso cantore) in a concert given by his son, Telemachus. Giovanni Paita
sang as Ulysses, with Rosaura Mazzanti (Penelope) and Giovanni Carestini (Telemaco). The libretto
states that Ulisse was offered as the last opera of Carnival.'* The production should therefore have
opened late in January. A license to print the libretto was issued on 19 January 1724 [M.V.].

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 589; Groppo 593; Wiel 238; Alm 740

1725/3 La Rosmira fedele Music by Leonardo Vinci
[ROSMIRA THE FAITHFUL]
A dramma per musica Text by Silvio Stampiglia'

MM Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1725-01-31

& Dedicated to Nicold del Tocco

TORS The text of Partenope (1707/14), which recounts the flight of a white dove from Negroponte to the
spot on which the city of Partenope [Naples] would be founded, was revised for this work.'* It was
atimely choice, for this season brought a large influx of Neapolitans. Rosmira fedele was first performed
on31 January 1725 (A, NV), when it received universal applause (A, DO).'* That it follows Berenice
(1725/1) so closely suggests a poor reception of the earlier work. Antonia Merighi sang as Parthenope
with Faustina Bordoni as Rosmira. Musical excerpts from Rosmira were used in Handel's pastiche
Elpidia (HWV A1).' Vivaldi later set Stampiglia's text on the same subject (Rosmira) for Sant' Angelo
(1738/2). The final setting of this text appears to have been Cocchi's (San Samuele, 1753).

A Score in GB-Lbl; arias in D-MUs (quarta); F-Pc; I-Vnm (quarta)

Listed as Bonlini 590; Groppo 594; Wiel 234; Alm 741

1725/4 Gli sdegni cangiati in amore Music attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini!*
[DISDAIN CHANGED TO LOVE]
A dramma [per musica] Libretto adapted by G. M. Buini (?) from Francesco Silvani
M1 Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Giovedi Grasso)
With Vespetta e Pimpinone; balli SORTING DATE: 1725-02-03~
& Dedicated to Alderano Malaspina'*'

OOE The text was based on that of // duello d'amore e di vendetta (1699/10), which had been set by
Marc' Antonio Ziani. The action was set in Seville during the reign of Roderic/Rodrigo, the last Gothic
34 Neapolitan holding.
'4 Tn English translations of which Ulysses is normally called Odysseus.
'S This statement taken to refer to the sequence of works given at Sant' Angelo.
'4 The dedication was signed by Donarelo Ciuni.
'47 Groppo MS, p. 202.

8 The title appears as La Rosalinda fedele both in the avviso and in the entry in the Diario ordinario, No. 1175, p. 8. The 31st was normally
a proscribed date, but sometimes when Ash Wednesday fell very early, the schedule of official commemorations was revised.

8 Swiney advised on 13 August 1726 that the work not be produced in London because the book was the very worst [one] ... that I have
ever read in my life (Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 369).

'50 It is not inconceivable that this setting was by L. A. Predieri, who had set the same text (// duello d'amore) for performance in Livorno
in 1718. Other productions of Buini's work are unknown. A scenario for a like-named, privately produced entertainment (text by Niccold
Zoppio Turchi, music by Francesco Bonino) was published in Bologna in 1646.

'S' Duke of Massa and Carrara.

380

fi

 1725a
 1725b

1725/5

TI

&
Oo

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

ruler in Spain. The opening of Gli sdegni, which was delayed by personnel problems, apparently took
place shortly after 30 January 1724 M.V. with a depleted cast.'** The announced cast included Antonio
Gaspari (Rodrigo), Chiara Orlandini (his wife, Esilena), and Anna Gird (Evanco, the son of his enemy).
The dedicatee was so impressed with the singing of Anna Giro that he gave her 60 zecchini.'* She spent
half the money to buy a harpsichord made by Domenico da Pesaro. Gird's mentor, Antonio Vivaldi,
was accused of pocketing the other half, but the charges against him were later dropped.'TM
Gaspari's legal affidavits of 31 January give a vivid picture of the conflict between himself (as impresario)
and some of the singers. He complained that Angelo Maria Cantelli (Fernando) and his daughter, Stella
Fortunata Cantelli (Florinda), arrived for both the autumn and Carnival productions unprepared. Many
of his remarks alluded to the production of // nemico amante (1724/9), although he implied that all the
productions at San Moise (presumably including Laodice [1724/5] and Agide [1724/13] ) were affected.
He complained of the performers' insults and prejudices, their premature departures from rehearsals,
their having implicated him in a scandal, the poor example they set for other musicians, the fact that
they wanted changes in the arias and recitatives after the libretti had been printed, and that Stella Cantelli
pretended to have lost her voice on one occasion and sang in a low voice on others. On some evenings
she did not sing the arias but failed to advise other singers to take them in her place. He deferred the
start of Gli sdegni cangiati until such time as the Cantelli promised to be punctual.

Gaspari further objected to the announced departure of Felice Novelli (Giuliano) for Germany and Prague
with Antonio Denzio, given that Novelli had signed a contract for the autumn and winter seasons on
the preceding 27 March [1724]. Gaspari expected him to return by 20 May [1725]. He warned all three
singers that they would be required to repay his own losses should they further fail to meet their
contractual obligations.'**

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 591; Groppo 595; Wiel 239; Alm 742

Nerone detronato dal trionfo di Sergio Gabalo. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

La caccia in Etolia. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

L'amor eroico Music by Giovanni Francesco Brusa
[HEROIC LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1725-05-09

Dedicated to Edward Cary'**

Septimus Odaenathus/Odenato, the king of Palmyra, who was long a secret admirer of the Assyrian
princess Zenobia, refused an offer to marry the Persian princess Aspasia. Incensed, Aspasia's father
sent his general, Pharnakes, to declare war. Odaenathus won the battle, but in order to win the hand
of Zenobia he had to defeat her alter ego, a military captain, in battle.'*' L amor eroico opened on 9
May 1725, the eve of Ascension, and was expected to run for sixteen days (NV). A license to print
the libretto had been issued on 30 April. The text had been set as Zenobia e Radamisto, with music
by Fortunato Chelleri, for the emperor Charles VI (Barcelona, 1709).

'32 |Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti P. P. de Bonis, Busta 1732, entries of 30 Gennaro 1724 [M.V.] et al.
8' More than 200 ducats.
'54 Moretti, Cembalo, p. 58.

'S5 Denzio appeared in Prague annually between 1724 and 1727 and he had roles in seven works given between 1730 and 1732. The commentaries
cited here summarize the writings of 31 Gennaio 1724 M.V. in I-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti P. P. de Bonis, Busta 1732.

'86 Cary, a Scottish viscount, was the commander of the British Admiralty.

'S7 Although the background superficially resembles Marchi's text for Albinoni's Zenobia (1694/5), this work involves significantly fewer
characters and tells a substantially different story.



fi

 1725
 1725d
 1725e
 1725f
 1725g
 1725h

1725/6

OO8

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 381

Giovanni Carestini sang as Septimus Odaenathus, with Santa Marchesini (Zenobia; she was better known
as a performer of comic intermezzi), Anna Guglielmini (Aspasia), and Lucia Lancetti (Farnace). Owen
Swiney' wrote on 11 May 1725 that an unnamed work by Brusa had been given three times and that
the music was intollerable. He allowed, however, that Marchesini was the best on account of her
acting and her singing in the true Lombard style, whereas Guglielmi, while being a very handsome
Girle, was a bitter singer.'? A full house was reported ten days after the opening.' Johann
Mattheson cited the work in his Critica Musica."*'

No musical sources known
Listed as Wiel 241; Bonlini 593; Groppo 597; Alm 745

Serenata at the French Embassy. Cf. Suppl. Sa.
Serenata at the Imperial Embassy. Cf. Suppl. Sa.
Gloria e Imeneo. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Calisto in orsa. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Nasce per vivere sempre. Cf. Suppl. Sa.

La senna festeggiante. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

L'inganno trionfante in amore Music partly by Antonio Vivaldi
[THE DECEPTION TRIUMPHANT IN LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Matteo Noris by Gio. Maria Ruggieri
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1725-11-17~

Dedicated to Stefano Pallavicino'

The plot, set previously by Perti as Laodicea e Berenice (1694/8), focuses on the attack of Antiochos
on Ptolemy. As an enticement to peace, the princess Cleonike was promised as a bride to the Egyptian
tuler. Ptolemy rightly suspected, however, that the claim made by Antiochos that Stresicreia was his
friend but not his wife was false. To make his boast appear to be true, however, Antiochos went through
the motions of banishing her. Misunderstanding his motives, Stresicreia ordered the death of Cleonike.'
The anticipated date of opening was 10 November 1725 (NV). A much later opening (shortly before
15 December) is suggested elsewhere (A). The Diario ordinario, perhaps judging by the expectation,
says it had opened by 24 November.' Writing on the 28th, Owen Swiney was critical of the small

'S Active as an impresario (of dubious reputation) in London in the early 1710s. He spent the later 1720s in Venice.

'8 Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 355. His effort to take Marchesini to London was thwarted by her demands of 1,500 zecchini (150 guineas).
' Diario ordinario, No. 1219, p. 4.

'! Critica musica, ii (1725), 286f.

 Groppo MS, p. 204.

8 Probably not Stefano Benedetto Pallavicino, the son of the composer Carlo and a celebrated librettist in Dresden. The noble surname Pallavicino
was found in the western Veneto, Lombardy, and the Piedmont.

4 The libretto was signed by Antonio Biscione.

'65 Diario ordinario, No. 1301, p. 6.

382 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

voice of Costanza Posterla, who made her Venetian debut as Stresicreia.'% He had no comment on

the other principal members of the cast  Innocenzio Baldini (Antioco) and Elisabetta Moro (Cleonice).'
A Aria in D-B

Listed as Bonlini 594; Groppo 598; Wiel 236; Alm 746; RV 721

1725/7 Alcina delusa da Ruggero Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni'*
[ALCINA DELUDED BY ROGER]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Marchi
MM Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With Dorina e Nibbio and balli SORTING DATE: 1725-11-24
ra) Without dedicatee

-O@ Ariosto's model is acknowledged in the libretto. This particular account is relatively modest in
conception.' It was revised as 1732/2. Alcina was first performed on 24 November 1725 (A, NV) with
common applause (A). A license to print the libretto had been issued on 18 November 1725. The
cast included Anna Maria Mangani (Alcina), Angela Zannucchi (Bradamante), and Giovanni (Johann)
Dreyer (Ruggero). Giorgio Crescenzio, who had earlier served at Sant' Angelo, was engaged to assist
the impresario Giovanni Orsato.'

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 595; Groppo 599; Wiel 231; Alm 747

1725/8 Siface Music by Nicold Porpora'
[SYPHAX]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1725-12-26
is Without dedicatee
o In this familiar story, Syphax, the king of Numidia, and Viriatus, the king of Lusitania,' sealed their

peace with the marriage of the first to Viriate, the daughter of the latter. Crossing the shore of North
Africa to retrieve his bride, however, Syphax met and fell in love with Ismene, the daughter of Orcan,
a local prince. The subject had been treated in David's libretto for La forza della virtit (1692/10). It
was retold once more in Hasse's Viriate (1739/2).

O When Siface opened on 26 December 1725 (A), it met with common applause.' The title-page was
dated 1726. Printing licenses had been issued on 16 and 17 December 1725. Owen Swiney wrote on
the 28th that the musick is excellent; and commended by every body of a true taste. The masters of

66 Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 362. Ilias Chrissochoidis has kindly called my attention to a letter from the fourth earl of Shaftesbury to James
Harris (8 May 1739) regarding the final performance of Handel's Saul [HWV 53; 19 April] in which two new women, mother and ddaughter
participated. The first [Costanza Posterla]] is a fine actress, and a good mistress of notes, though her voice is too weak for a large theater.
The second was her daughter, Chiara. The singer's husband offered a violin concerto. (See Donald Burrows and Rosemary Dunhill, Music
and Theatre in Handel's World [Oxford University Press, 2002], 70).

8' No role for Ptolemy/Tolomeo was included.
68 Albinoni's name is pasted into some copies of the libretto, from which it is otherwise absent.

'9 Handel's Alcina (HWV 34; 1735), which is said to have been adapted from an anonymous text, L 'isola di Alcina (1728), has no known
relationship to the present work.

' Miggiani, La Romanina, forthcoming.

'" This famous Neapolitan composer and singing teacher (1686-1768) no sooner arrived in Venice than he was engaged in a musical rivalry
with his compatriot, Leonardo Vinci. This battle was waged chiefly on the stage of S. Giovanni Grisostomo over the next two theatrical years.

'? The historical Lusitania coincided with most of what today is Portugal.

"3 Tt opened in Milan on the same day.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 383

musick, their protectors [and] adherents. ..are sworn enemies to it, or, rather, to the composer of it,'
who is look'd upon...as a foreigner, or an interloper. Nicolino'' [Siface] and the Romanina' [Viriate]
act mighty well, and Paita'' [Orcano] both sings and acts in it prodigiously. He is without doubt the
first man in Italy for a delicacy of singing.'* Productions of the work continued through 1732 in a

number of places. Pellegrino Tomi debuted as Libanius.'
A Scores in B-Br; GB-Lbl (Acts 1, 3)
Listed as Bonlini 596; Groppo 600; Wiel 245; Alm 749

1725/9 Turia Lucrezia Music by Antonio Pollarolo
[TuRIA LUCRETIA]
A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
rd Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1725-12-27
& Dedicated to Lothar Franz, Count of Schenborn'*

The ever-faithful Turia Lucretia sought to conceal the whereabouts of her husband, Quintus Lucretius,
by wandering through the streets of Rome tearfully calling for him and petitioning the Triumvirate to
free him. A spurious subplot, in which the young Lepidus fell in love with the heroine, was added to
this historical skeleton by Lalli.

Oe Turia Lucrezia was first performed on 27 December 1725 (A, NV), when it received common applause
(A); the dedication was signed on the preceding day. A license to print the libretto had been issued
on the 12th. The underground passage in which Quintus was hidden was shown in the opening and
closing scenes. The second act featured a library adorned with local and world maps.

8 Owen Swiney wrote on the 28th of Costanza Posterla, who sang in the title role, that her person [and]
action [were] very passable but [that she had] a small voice."*! Other members of the cast included
Innocenzio Baldini (Quinto Lucrezio) and Michele Salvatici (Lepido).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 597; Groppo 601; Wiel 253; Alm 750

1725/10 __L'inganno innocente Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[THE INNOCENT DECEPTION]

A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani

rd Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)

With Dirondella e Dirindone' SORTING DATE: 1725-12-28~

' This was the first Venetian production of a work by the Neapolitan Porpora.
"5 Nicola Grimaldi.

'6 Marianna Benti Bulgarelli. Her salary for the 1725-26 season appears to have been 3,001 ducats (meeting her request that it exceed 3,000).
See Miggiani, La Romanina, forthcoming.

"7 Giovanni Paita.

"8 Gibson, Royal Academy, pp. 361f. Swiney maintained incorrectly, in his account of this work, that it was a linear descendant of La forza
della virtit (1692/10).

' By the autumn of 1728, he was requesting permission to spend Carnival in Bologna (I-Vas, PS, Busta 153, f. 105r). He spent many future
Carnivals away, several of them overseas.

8 This count of Schenborn, who held the title from 1693 to 1729, was currently serving as the emperor's vice-chancellor in Venice.
'! Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 362.

' Published under the title Intermezzo primo.

384

OOE

1726/1

mM

fs)
OO

1726/2

im

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Dedicated to Thomas Kirkpatrick'

This revised version of the work earlier produced at Sant' Angelo (1701/4) was in production by 28
December 1725, when Owen Swiney wrote that Teresa Zannucchi (Climene) was a beautiful figure,
in mens cloathes; acts well; does not sing amiss; but her voice is indifferent.'** Giovanni Dreyer sang
as Rodrigo. The title-page was dated 1726. Licenses to print the libretto had been issued on 20 and
21 December 1725. A Bolognese singer (perhaps Giuseppe Toselli, who sang as Amurat) returned to
his native city in the middle of the production because he had not been paid.'*

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 598; Groppo 602; Wiel 249; Alm 751

Cunegonda Music attributed to Antonio Vivaldi
[KUNEGUNDA]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Agostino Piovene
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1726-01-29
Without dedicatee

This account was derived from the work set by Gasparini as La principessa fedele (1709/8). The
production opened on 29 January 1726 (NV) with greater than usual satisfaction (A).'* Although
the text had been used before, a new license to print the libretto was issued on 22 January. Costanza
Posterla sang in the title role with Innocenzio Baldini (Ridolfo) and Luca Mingoni (Aladin).'*' The visual
conception appears to have been entirely different from that of Gasparini's earlier work. The principal
scenes of Act Two, for example, occurred in the harem (serraglio) in which Kunegunda was confined
during her African captivity.

Although Voltaire is not known to have had any knowledge of this work or its predecessor, the princess
Cunegonde of his satire Candide (1759) had adventures not unlike those related here. After her abduction
to South America, Cunegonde reappeared as a Muslim slave in Constantinople and was able to rescue
Candide in Egypt. In Voltaire's work, many opinions about Venetian opera were expressed by the
nobleman Pococurante [Doer of Nothing] at his country estate on the Brenta.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 599; Groppo 603; Wiel 251; Alm 752; RV 707

Siroe, re di Persia Music by Leonardo Vinci
[SIROES, KING OF PERSIA]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1726-02-02
Without dedicatee

'S The libretto tells us little about Kirkpatrick except that he was a Scot.
'* Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 362.

'85 Miggiani, La Romanina, forthcoming. This is the only production in which Toselli sang.

'86 Literally non ordinaria sodisfazione. The same account is given in the Diario ordinario, No. 1330, p. 3.

'7 Innocenzio Baldini appeared at Sant' Angelo throughout the 1725-26 season, adding some credibility to the complaint of Lucrezia Baldini
that she had expected to apprear in the terza there. But the terza for which she had learned a role was Venezia nascente (text by Benedetto
Pasqualigo, music by Antonio Vivaldi), which remained unproduced for several years (see Suppl. 1, entries for 1726 and 1731).

Ow

1726/3

t 2

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 385

Siroes, the older son of Chosroes/Cosroe, and his brother Medarses each wanted to succeed to the Persian
throne.'** In this account the present king, Chosroes, having defeated Ashite, the king of Cambaia, became
the object of the revenge of Ashite's daughter, Emira. Assuming the male persona Idaspe, she became
Chosroes' political confidante. Her schemes resulted in his order to have his older, well-regarded son
Siroes, who was in love with Emira, executed. She confessed her true identity just in time to prevent
Medarses from killing his father. The action took place in Seleukia.

When Siroe was first performed on 2 February 1726 (NV) it elicited universal satisfaction (A). The
title-page was dated 1726; a license to print the libretto had been issued on 27 January 1725 [M.V.].
A report of the 20th in the Diario ordinario said that its applause was ever greater (sempre piit
grande).' Groppo, writing 41 years later, said the work made the name of its librettist immortal.'

In a letter of 16 February 1726, Metastasio wrote, My Siroe is praised much more than Didone was
last year.!' Bonlini echoed his report, saying that Siroe was universally appreciated and made the
name of its author immortal.! The cast featured Giovanni Paita (Cosroe), Nicola Grimaldi (Siroe),
Giovanni Carestini (Medarse), and Marianna Benti Bulgarelli (Emira). The scenery for this production
was designed by Marco Ricci and painted by the veteran Romualdo Mauro. The scenery topics were
nonetheless traditional and included an opening venue in the temple of the Sun, a royal park, and a
large town square, as well as various interior rooms.

Metastasio's text was reset by Vivaldi (RV 735) for productions in Reggio (spring 1727'%), Ancona
(summer 1738), and Ferrara (December 1738'). It was reset by Manna as 1743/4. Handel's setting
of an adaptation by Haym (HWV 24) had an ill-fated London premiere on 17 February 1728, when
it ran head-to-head with the first ballad opera to be given in England, The Beggar's Opera by John
Gay and Christopher Pepusch.

Scores in D-MUs; GB-Cfm, Lam, Lem; US-We

Listed as Bonlini 600; Groppo 604; Wiel 244; Alm 753, 754

La fede tradita e vendicata Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[FAITH BETRAYED AND VINDICATED]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1726-02-16

Dedicated to Johann Mattheus, Count of Schulenburg'*

Silvani's text had been the basis of the earlier setting by Francesco Gasparini (San Cassiano, 1704/1;
San Moise, 1715/7). While the Goths were locked in combat with the Scandinavians, several parties

'8 The figure of Chosroes could have evoked the spirit of the Crusades through his capture of Jerusalem (as well as Egypt and other parts
of North Africa). He had confiscated the cross. The background was also contemporary with the establishment of Islam. Chosroes was known
for the opulence of his palace.

' Diario ordinario, No. 1338, p. 3.
' Groppo MS, p. 206.

'' Strohm, Werke, p. 229 (citing Brunelli, Metastasio, ii, n. 25): Il mio Siroe e alle stelle molto pit: che non fece la Didone |'anno scorso.
(Albinoni set Metastasio's Didone for production at San Cassiano as 1724/12.)

192 64

Questo drama, universalmente gradito, ha reso immortale il nome del suo celebre autore (Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 200).

'3 Fabbri and Verti (Due secoli, p. 59) err in saying that the music for the Venetian production of 1726 was by Vivaldi.

' Claiming to have composed 94 operas by then, Vivaldi was disturbed by the poor reception accorded Siroe in its Ferrara performance. In
a letter to Bentivoglio on 2 January 1739 he blamed the incompetence of the harpsichordist Pietro Antonio Berretta in accompanying recitatives
and offered to withdraw from preparing Farnace for the second part of Carnival (Heller, Cronologia, pp. 6, 250).

'5 Schulenburg could have heard reports of the work as given in Gasparini's setting (1704/1; 1715/7) from his sister Ehrengard, who, as a
companion to George I of England, could have attended it at San Moise in the latter year.

386 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

on both sides fell victim to the enchantments of the Norwegian princess Hernelinde/Ernelinda.'* The
text was reset by Antonio Bioni for Wroclaw (Breslau) in 1729 and anonymously for Graz in 1736.
OGE La fede was first performed on 16 February 1726 with universal applause (A, NV); it was mentioned
without comment in DO on the 20th. A license to print the libretto had been issued on the 10th. The
cast included Luca Mingani (Ricimero), Michele Salvatici (Rodoaldo), Costanza Posterla (Ernelinda),
and Elisabetta Moro (Edvige). These evidences of success are offset by notary records indicating that
the Mauro brothers were behind in their payments to creditors, among whom were Almor6 Giustinian
(the owner of the theater) and unnamed composers.'
fi Aria in D-Dlb
Listed as Bonlini 601; Groppo 605; Wiel 254; Alm 755; RV 712

1726/4 Amore e Sdegno' Music attributed to Luigi Tavelli
[LOVE AND DISDAIN]
A dramma per musica Text by Michel Angiolo Boccardi'TM
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Vespetta e Pimpinone SORTING DATE: 1726-02-20
o Dedicated to Niccolo Contarini, Nob. Ven.

After murdering the eastern emperor, the tyrant Nicephoros Phocas worried that the widowed empress
Nicaea would ascend to the throne. To smooth his own way to a higher post, he offered the hand of
his daughter to the [Holy Roman] emperor Otto [the Great, 962-73]. He later regretted not having offered
her instead to seal an alliance with the Persian king, Tigranes. The setting was Constantinople.'?
IC) This reworking of Silvani's La moglie nemica (set by M. A. Ziani for S. Salvatore as 1694/1) was first
performed on 20 February 1726 (NV) with common satisfaction (A). The title-page was dated 1726.
A license to print the libretto (with the provisional title Ottone amante, under which Groppo reported
it) had been issued on 15 February 1725 [M.V.]. The work attracted a full house. Giovanni Dreyer
played the tyrant, with Anna Maria Mangani as Nicaia and Gerolama Valsecchi as her daughter,
Theodelinda.TM The girl's prospective suitors were Angela (Ortone) and Teresa Zannucchi (Tigrane).
A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 602; Groppo 606; Wiel 248; Alm 756

 1726a La fama della della gloria, dell'amore, e della virtu, dell'innocenza. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

 1726b La ninfa Apollo. See Suppl. 7.

86 Among the characters, Ricimer is now Ataulso, Umblo is Grimoaldo, and Scandone is Rodoaldo. At least the argomento expresses the
intention that these changes should occur. Ricimero's name is unchanged in the actual drama; Umblo/Grimoaldo has no role in the work.

'7 |.Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Fr. Biondi, Busta 1939, items of 22 Maggio and 12 Luglio 1726.

' Boccardi was active in Venice in the later 1720s and in Dresden in the early 1730s.

' This text and its antecedent (La moglie nemica, 1694/1) represent ill-posed historical conflations. There can be chronological concordance
between Otto the Great and Nikephoros II Phokas. Only a century separates Tigranes from the Roman emperor Otho [69AD], but Byzantium
would have been anachronistic. Silvani was prone to cast history as complete fiction, as he seems to have done in La moglie. Boccardi's aim
must have been entirely practical.

2 Diario ordinario, No. 1338, p. 3.

20! Valsecchi, who later married the violin virtuoso Luigi Madonis, had made her Venetian debut at Sant' Angelo in Ristori's Orlando furioso
(1714/5). Traveling with the troupe of A. M. Peruzzi, she appeared in operas in Brussels (1727) and intermezzi in Paris (1729). Madonis worked
with Peruzzi in Wroctaw (1726) and Frankfurt (1728). His appearance at the Concerts spirituelles (1728) was so well received that he was
hired by its orchestra. In 1731 he was engaged for six years by the Venetian ambassador to Paris, but he and his wife left Paris to join the court
at St. Petersburg in the spring of 1733. Luigi's brother Antonio, who played violin and horn, worked at the court from 1733 to 1746.

1726/5

M1

CO

1726/6

202

mM

QOL

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 387

I rivali generosi Music by Giuseppe Vignatti2
[THE GENEROUS RIVALS]

A dramma per musica Text derived from Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With Ceriletta e Tropotipo; balli SORTING DATE: 1726-05-26
Without dedicatee

In this text, which had been set by Marc' Antonio Ziani for San Salvatore (1697/3), Italy was ruled by
the tyrannical Visigothic king Vittigis (Angelo Zannoni). Belisarius (Giuseppe Ristorini) subdued the
enemy in Ravenna. The king's inability to forget his love for Elpidia (Vittoria Tesi), princess of Puglia,
precipitated new discord among her several admirers.

I rivali was first performed on 26 May 1726 (A, NV), the Sunday before Ascension. It closed on
13 June (NV). A license to print the libretto had been issued on 22 May. Swiney considered it the
worst [opera] I have ever heard, despite the fact that Nicola Grimaldi (Olindo) and Vittoria Tesi acted
very well in it.? Handel and Nicola Haym combined portions of the 1697 work with newer arias to
create the pastiche Elpidia overo Gli rivali generosi(HWV A1) for performance at the King's Theatre,
London, in May 1725.

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 604; Groppo 608; Wiel 260; Alm 758

Le frenesie d'amore Music attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
[THE MADNESS OF LOVE]

A divertimento [comico] per musica Text attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1726-05-26
Without dedicatee

Le frenesie d'amore was the first Bolognese comic opera to be given in Venice. As /I savio delirante
it had been given during Carnival of the same year at the Teatro Formigliari in Bologna. It was amodern
adaptation of the commedia dell'arte. Set in Bologna, it features a learned but dramatically static
Doctor, the singing teacher Lindoro, the dilettante Flema, an old woman (Crespa), and her (mute)
serving maid (Zirina).** The staging emphasizes distinctions of social class: Bolognese dialect is
employed by the less well-educated characters, such as Crespa.

Le frenesie was first performed in Venice on 26 May 1726 (A, NV).2 It closed on 13 June (NV). In
what was to become the norm for early comic opera, it was performed by a troupe whose names were
not given in the libretto. Since singers for serious opera worked on individual contracts, it is possible
that the work was sung by comedians. On 22 May the financial debts of the Mauro (Antonio and
Gasparo), which reached back to 1722, were the subject of discussion before the Council of Ten. A

Vignatti was maestro di cappella of the court in Milan.

2% Cited only in the Bonlini MS addenda.

204 Mentioned in the Diario ordinario, No. 1380, but without a precise opening date.
205 Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 366.

206 An A prefix in the HWV catalogue identifies works for which the music is lost.

27 In the commedia dell arte, the Dottore was normally a learned Bolognese. This Dottore is explicitly Ferrarese.

208 A note to the reader candidly remarked that the only purpose of the work was to distract the spirit from worldly cares but that, nonetheless,
it would be given in music.

2 The title for this work is reported as // delirio d'amore in NV and the Diario ordinario, No. 1380, p. 4.

388

fi

 1726c
 17264
 1726e
 1726f
 1726g

1726/7

M1

OOn

A

 1726h
 17261

1726/8

rT

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

schedule for restitution of back rent was approved in July, but it is unclear whether the debts were ever
repaid to Almord Giustinian, the theater's owner.?!

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 605; Groppo 609; Wiel 258; Alm 759

Serenata (untitled) for the name-day of Louis XV. See Suppl. 5a.
La fenice. See Suppl. Sa.

Andromeda liberata. See Suppl. 5a.

La fuga di Teseo. See Suppl. 5a.

Il ritratto dell'eroe. See Suppl. 9.

Imeneo in Atene Music by Nicold Porpora
[HYMENAEUS IN ATHENS]

A componimento dramatico Text by Silvio Stampiglia
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Summer (Assumption)
With Ceriletta e Tropotipo," balli SORTING DATE: 1726-09-20

Without dedicatee?

The young Hymenaeus, being of lowly estate, saw no chance of marrying the young noblewoman
Chlomyris/Clomiri with whom he had fallen in love. On one occasion, when an assembly of women
was attacked by a marauding group of corsairs, Hymenaeus killed the villains and liberated all the women
on the condition that he be permitted to marry his beloved. From this incident he came to symbolize
a happy groom. His name was frequently invoked at weddings.

Imeneo was first performed in Venice on 20 September 1726 (NV), specifically to coincide with the
continuing visit of Cardinal Ottoboni. A license to print the libretto had been issued on the 14th. Jmeneo
had ten performances, the last having been on 2 October (following a regatta).?? This work received
universal applause (A). Antonia Merighi sang in the title role, with Lucrezia Baldini as Chlomyris.
Imeneo had had its premiere in Naples in 1723. The text enjoyed modest popularity and was later set
by Terradellas (Venice, 1750/4) and Jommelli (Ludwigsburg, 1765).

Scores in D-DIb; F-Pn

Listed as Bonlini 606; Groppo 610; Wiel 259; Alm 760

Introduction to the comedy season at San Samuele. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Il re che non e re. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Amor indovino Music attributed to Antonio Cortona
[LovE FORETOLD]

A favola pastorale Text attributed to Giovanni Battista Neri
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Lidia e Ircano SORTING DATE: 1726-10-26

210 1-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Fr. Biondi, Busta 1939, entry by date.
2'' Cited in Groppo MS, p. 482.

2!2 A Ithough no dedicatee was listed in the libretto, the unusually early opening was decreed by the Council of Ten at the behest of Pietro Ottoboni,
who left Venice for villeggiatura on 2 October and returned to the city on the 31st. He departed for Rome only on 3 December (Benigna,
Memorie, f. 31; I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 177, ff. 398, 440). Numerous works were given privately on Ottoboni's behalf. They are listed in Suppl.
5. It is unclear whether the opening performance of this work was private. On subsequent days it was open to the public.

2!3 T_Rvat, AS, NV, N. 177, entries of 21 Settembre (f. 358v) and 5 Ottobre 1726 (f. 371). Also cited in Benigna, Memorie, f. 31, entry of
20 Settembre, which says that the work was given at the insistence of the cardinal and with the special permission of the Council of Ten.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 389

rs Dedicated to Count Pietro Zanardi

Oo Orinda, the daughter ofa shepherd on the slopes of Mt. Ida, was supposed to marry a woodland savage.
Instead she mysteriously disappeared. A cryptic message led her pursuers to the hut of a group of
shepherds, but Orinda, who had assumed the name of Eurilla (Gerolima Moreni), did not seem to be
among them. The decoding of another cryptic message was required before the intended wedding could
be performed.?"* Amor indovino was first performed on 26 October 1726 (A, NV),' the date of its
dedication by Giovanni Orsato. A printing license, granted on the 13th, designated the intended time
of performance as October.

fi No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 607; Groppo 611; Wiel 256; Alm 761

1726/9 Dorilla in Tempe Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[DoRILLA IN THE TEMPE GORGE]
A melodramma eroico-pastorale Text by Anton Maria Lucchini
tr Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1726-11-09
& Dedicated to Count Antonio San Bonifacio

The Tempe River gorge, which lay between Mts. Olympus and Ossa, separated Thessaly from Macedonia.
In this anachronistic plot, the setting is pastoral and there are no historical associations, although there
is a token role for Admetos (Lorenzo Moretti), the king of Thessaly. His daughter Dorilla (Angela
Capuano) was loved both by Nomio and by Elmiro (Maria Maddalena Pieri). Elmiro was pursued by
the nymph Eudamia (Anna Gird), who in turn was loved by Filindo. Nomio revealed himself to be Apollo
and blessed the unions of both Dorilla with Elmiro and of Eudamia with Filindo.

OOn Dorilla was first performed on 9 November 1726 (A, NV)," the date of dedication of the libretto. A
report of the 16th states that Dorilla was enjoying much greater attendance than the work at San Moise
(L'amor indovino, 1726/8). Dorilla was produced at the theater of Count FrantiSek Antonin von Sportk
in Prague in the spring of 1732.'* A revised version was later given at Sant' Angelo (1734/2).?

A Score (1734) in I-Tn
Listed as Bonlini 608; Groppo 612; Wiel 250; Alm 762; RV 709

1726/10 I trionfo di Flavio Olibrio Music by Giovanni Porta?
[THE VICTORY OF FLAVIUS OLYBRIUS]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1726-11-25
az Dedicated to Marquis Ludovico Rangoni

2'4 Neri's text had been set twice previously, once as L enigma disciolto (1705/2) and once as Gl amici rivali (1714/7).

2!5 The work is mentioned, but without a date of opening, under the title L onore indovina in the report of 2 November in the Diario ordinario,
No. 1447, p. 3.

216 Strohm (Opernarien, ii, 252) says this work was revived at Santa Margherita in 1728, but no evidence of it has been found.
2"7 Diario ordinario, No. 1452, p. 7.

218 Sporek (1662-1738 ) was the High Commissioner of Bohemia. His family's estate at Lysa (on the Elbe some twenty miles from Prague)
encouraged him to visit Dresden and Leipzig, where he became acquainted with the music of J. S. Bach, from whom he commissioned four
masses. He was also a great fan of the corno da caccia. He was a prolific author and patron of works on religion and philosophy. This led
to his indictment for violation of Bohemia's strict censorship laws and the confiscation of his vast library in the early 1730s.

2! For a comparison of the sources for this work, see Pancino, Le opere, iv.

0 Although Porta was described as famous in librettos for other theaters, he is here identified as a member of the Accademia Filarmonica
and maestro di coro at the Pieta.

390

oe)

1726/11

Op,

1726/12

COe

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

The text was a modified version of Gasparini's Flavio Anicio Olibrio (1708/3). It recounted the story
of Ricimer (Andrea Pacini), the liberation of his sister, Theodelinda (Lucia Facchinelli), and his
enslavement of Placidia (Anna d' Ambreville), the daughter of Valentinian. The title role (Diana Vico)
belonged to the general of the Roman army, who loved Placidia. The production opened on 25 November
1726 (A), when it elicited universal applause.! A license to print the libretto, which was dedicated
on the 23rd, had been issued on the 17th. Swiney praised the text, the music, and the performances
of Pacini and Vico.

Arias in I-Vnm (prima)

Listed as Bonlini 610; Groppo 614; Wiel 243; Alm 764

Il trionfo d'Armida Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[THE TRIUMPH OF ARMIDE]

A dramma per musica Text by Girolamo Colatelli
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1726-12-02
Without dedicatee

Albinoni came late to this popular First-Crusade subject. Colatelli commented that he had moderated
the character of Armide to be modest rather than lascivious, in comparison to his earlier treatment
of the same story, set by Orgiani as L 'onor al cimento (1703/2). II trionfo was first performed on
2 December 1726 (A) before a great number of persons, among whom many are likely to have been
Neapolitan. A license to print the libretto was issued on 29 November. No cast list was given, perhaps
reflecting the restrictions of the theater, to which reference is made in the dedication.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 609; Groppo 613; Wiel 257; Alm 763

Meride e Selinunte Music by Nicold PorporaTM*
[MERIS AND SELINUNTE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1726-12-26
Without dedicatee

In this tale of ancient Sicily, Meris/Meride, having killed a Syracusan noble, was sentenced to death
by King Dionysios, but his friend Selinunte offered to accept Meris's punishment in her place. Both
men loved Herikleia/Ericlea, the princess of Taormina, as did Timocrates, the king's aid.

Meride opened in Venice on 26 December 1726 (A), when it received applause. The title-page was
dated 1727. Licenses to print the libretto had been issued on 19 and 20 December. The Diario ordinario
of 18 January [1727] noted that Meride e Selimante [sic], in common with other works which had recently

?2| The date of opening confirmed in I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 177, entry of 30 Novembre 1726, f. 427, but it is contradicted in Le Mercure galant,
Dec. 1726, p.2762, where 27 November 1726 is indicated. The 25th is supported by Owen Swiney's report of [Friday] the 29th that the work
opened last Monday (Gibson, Royal Academy, pp. 371f). He reports that Ambreville was married to the cellist Perone.

222 Tt seems remarkable that one person would return to a work he had apparently written more than 30 years earlier and change the portrayal
so substantially. It might therefore be questioned whether this libretto was truly by Colatelli, or rather by someone younger and less well
established, for example an impresario.

3 Opening date confirmed in I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 177, entry of 7 Decembre 1726, f. 440. Many Neapolitans were in Venice at this time.

?>4 Porpora is here identified as maestro delle figlie del coro at the Incurabili.
25 Opening date confirmed in I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 177, entry of 28 December 1726, f. 470.

1726/13

2

1727/1

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 391

opened, was enjoying a full house. The cast included Diana Vico (Meride), Paolo Mariani (Selinunte),
Giuseppe Rossi (Timocrate), Andrea Pacini (Dionisio), and Anna d' Ambreville (Ericlea). In March
1727, when Antonio Conti sent arias from the work to Madame de Caylus in Paris, he pointed out that
the words did not correspond to the music much less the decorations. The text had first been set
by Giuseppe Porsile for performance in Vienna in August 1721.

Scores in B-Be, Br; GB-Lam, Lbl (copy in US-Wc); arias in GB-Lbl; I-Vnm

Listed as Bonlini 611; Groppo 615; Wiel 247; Alm 765

Medea e Giasone Music by Francesco Brusa
[MEDEA AND JASON]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Palazzi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1726-12-27
Without dedicatee

In Greek mythology, the magician Medea's bewitching love for Jason enabled him to steal the golden
fleece. This account portrayed Jason's background, depicted the horrid forest in which Medea's
enchanted castle lay, and provided a role for Hypsipyle, the friendly queen of the island of Lemnos.
Medea was first performed on 27 December 1726 (A), when it received applause. It was still playing
toa full house on 18 January [1727]. A license to print the libretto had been issued on 22 December
1726. The cast included Angela Capuano (Medea), Maria Maddalena Pieri (Giasone), and Anna Gird
(Ussifile).

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 612; Groppo 616; Wiel 252; Alm 766

L'Adalvaldo furioso Music by Giacomo Maccari
[ADALWALD IN A FuRY]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Anton Maria Lucchini
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1727-01-07
Without dedicatee

While the Lombard kingdom was under the joint rule of the widow Theodelinda and her son Adalwald
[d. 626], the Roman emperor Heraclius schemed to undermine the loyalty of the Lombard army.
Heraclius's ambassador exploited Adalwald's youthful interests in gambling, feasting, and going to
the baths. After gaining his confidence, Heraclius then offered him a potion which caused Adalwald
to kill twelve of his princes in a mad frenzy.! Adalvaldo, which indirectly mocked the excesses of
Carnival, was first performed on 7 January 1727 (A, NV), when it produced common satisfaction

26 Diario ordinario, No. 1477, p. 11.

227

Conti's entry (...les paroles sont pas repondu a la musique non plus [les] decorations) of 13 March, p. 20.

28 1-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 177, entry of 28 Dicembre 1726 (f. 131) gives questa sera as the date of opening. Piero Weiss gives 26 December

in GO (I, 623).

 Diario ordinario, No. 1477, p. 11.

250 A Roman long associated with musical comedy, Maccari (c. 1700-1744) was hired as a tenor at at San Marco on 15 December 1720 and
was granted a pay increase on 4 March 1731 (I-Vas, PS, Busta 152, f. 120v; Busta 153, f. 133v). He was also a violinist. Many attributions
to Maccari (to whom Ortolani was generous) are problematical because so little is known about the composer's activities in Venice.

3! The cast is not identified in the libretto but is likely to have included members of the Denzio troupe. See // regno galante below.

392

1727/2

m1

TONG)

1727/3

rT

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

(A). The Diario ordinario noted on 18 January [1727] that L 'Addolorato furioso [sic] was enjoying
a full house.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 613; Groppo 617; Wiel 268; Alm 767

Aldiso* Music by Giovanni Porta
[ALDIso]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Claudio Nicola StampaTM
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1727-02-02
Without dedicatee

Aldiso took the Indies as its setting. The hero (Lucia Facchinelli) inherited the throne of Cambaia,
the most florid of Indies cities, but thereby excited the envy of his uncle Mexanes (Andrea Pacini),
who disguised himself as his nephew in order to be confirmed as the new king. Aldiso's mother, the
Amazon Oronta (Diana Vico), devised a way to end the tyranny of Mexanes.

San Giovanni's last drama of the season opened on 8 February 1727 (NV).TM The title-page was dated
1726. A license to print the libretto was issued on 2 February 1727 (for 1726). The Diario ordinario
carried a report on the 15th which said that A/deo [sic] was one of the most beautiful works which had
been given in a long time. On the 23rd, Antonio Conti wrote that the decorations were better than
those of the preceding work [Meride; 1726/12] but that the poetry (composition) was so detestable
and the music so sad that he slept through an entire act.

Arias in D-Dlb; I-Vnm (terza)

Listed as Bonlini 614; Groppo 618; Wiel 246; Alm 768

Farnace' Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[PHARNAKES]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Anton Maria Lucchini?
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1727-02-10
Without dedicatee

Pharnakes, a son of Mithridates, was killed by his own sword in battle with the Romans. In retaliation,
his angry father sent troops to occupy Cappadocia, which was ruled by the widowed queen Berenice.
She became indignant after the abduction of her daughter Thamyris, sided with the Romans, and sought
the total destruction of Pharnakes.

The version of this work corresponding to the UCLA libretto 770 for Carnevale, the music in I-Tn
MS Giordano 36, and the printing licence issued on 5 February 1727 opened on 10 February 1727 (A,
NV). The title-page and score are dated 1726. The production of a revised version in the autumn of
1727 (corresponding to UCLA 779 and I-Tn MS Giordano 37) cannot be verified from the sources used

282 Diario ordinario, No. 1477, p. 11.

?33 From Parma.

4 Also cited, but with the title Oronta, for this date in (A).
5 Diario ordinario, No. 1490, p. 2.
236 T-Vnm, MSS fr. App. 58 ( = 12102), p. 9.

237 Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 205) held that the text was derived from Silvani's, set by M. A. Ziani as La pace generosa (1700/3), but there are
no roles in common. It is similarly unrelated to Lalli's Farnace (1718/2).

238 Mancini et al. (Teatri, i/2, p. 42) note that one singer, Lucrezia Baldini, was (ina letter written by Vivaldi on 13 October 1726 [I-Vas, Avogaria
di Comun Civil, Busta 352/12] ) offered 200 ducats to sing in Farnace, provided that she sang in a third opera (a requirement that later became
a bone of contention).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 393

in this study. The alternative version may have been prefigured in a setting given (with anonymous
music) at the Teatro della Pergola, Florence, on 26 December 1725.TM

() Vivaldi was described in the libretto as the celebrated maestro employed by Prince Philip of Hesse-
Darmstadt. The cast included Maria Maddalena Pieri (Farnace), Angela Capuano (Berenice), and Anna
Gird (amiri). Farnace opened with an elaborate woodland scene in which Berenice's army could be
seen in the distance. Antonio Conti greatly preferred Vivaldi's Farnace to Porta's Aldiso (1727/2).
He found the libretto to be passable and the music to be very varied in its [achievement of] the sublime
and its [treatment of] the tender. When he sought in March to send arias from the work to Madame
de Caylus in Paris, he cited their vivacity and variety. Despite his enthusiasm, he nonetheless found
these arias to be inferior to the Psalms of Benedetto Marcello.

 Lucrezia Baldini, who had made her Venetian debut at San Samuele as Rosmilda in J rivali generosi
(1726/5), appeared here as Selinda. However, the complaints she filed with a notary suggest that the
production of Farnace as a third opera at Sant' Angelo may have been substituted for that of another
(La Venetia nascente, on a text by Benedetto Pasqualigo), in which she was to have sung.

- Farnace was produced, probably with revisions by Antonio Denzio, in the spring of 1730 at the theater
of Count Sporek in Prague. It found great approval there, according to a libretto annotation by Count
Wrtby.TM? Four other operas by Vivaldi were given in Prague over the next two years. Several singers
and instrumentalists previously active at Sant' Angelo (possibly including Vivaldi) participated in these
performances. Anna Gird sang in a number of later productions of Farnace (Pavia, May 1731; Mantua,
late January 1732; Treviso, c. 1737).TM*5 Vivaldi cancelled a production planned for the second opera
slot of Carnival 1739 in the Teatro Bonacossi in Ferrara after the first opera, a revival of his Siroe,
received a poor reception. Lucchini's text had a life of its own. It far surpassed in its durability the
earlier accounts of Morari and Lalli. It was performed in Spain and Portugal, in Belgium and Germany,
and in most cities of the Italian peninsula. Among its most notable later settings were those of Porta
(Bologna, 1731), Perez (Turin, 1751), Traetta (Naples, 1751), and Sarti (San Samuele, 1776).

A Scores in I-Tn (Pavia, 1731; Ferrara, 1738)
Listed as Bonlini 616; Groppo 620; Wiel 255; Alm 770; RV 71la

1727/4 L' Egeste Music attributed to Antonio Cortona
[AIGISTHOS]
A melodramma Text attributed to Carlo Pagani-Cesa*
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1727-02-12
& Without dedicatee

25 Wiel (Teatri, pp. 84, 87) deduced (incorrectly) that one version of the work had been given in 1726.

24 See Weaver, Florentine Theater, p. 249.

241 Selfridge-Field, Marcello, p. 20. Marcello's fifty Salmi di Davide were published in eight fascicles between 1724 and 1726.
2 On this, see the commentary on Venetia nascente (1726) and Veneia (1731) in Suppl. 1.

43 Heller (Cronologia, p. 50).

24 The libretto for this production is the first in which Vivaldi assumes, in addition to other titles, that of maestro di cappella to the duke of
Lorraine (Lothringen). Francis Stephen, the future husband (from 1736) of Maria Theresia and the eventual emperor (sitting as Francis I, from
1745) was resident in Florence.

45 For detailed comments on the many versions of this work, see Pancino, Le opere, iv.

246 The cancellation led to a legal dispute with the scenographer Antonio Mauro (Vivaldi's brother-in-law) in March 1739, Mauro insisted
that Vivaldi pay the singers, dancers, and instrumentalists engaged. Vivaldi countered that it was Mauro who should pay the other parties (see
Heller, Cronologia, pp. 67f.)

4 The first complete but only partly autograph; the second incomplete (Acts 1, 2 only) but autograph.

248 Little is known about Pagani-Cesa, who seems to have been a frequent librettist at San Moise over the next several years.

394 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

In this altered version of the story as given by Herodotus, the widowed Spartan king Aristaios wanted
to find a new wife without the effort of scouting the population of available subjects, so he tried to make
a pact with Aigisthos/Egeste for the purchase of his wife, Amphia.

oo L Egeste was first performed on 12 February 1727 (A, NV), even though, according to the libretto,
it was intended for the end of Carnival [February 25th]. A license to print the libretto had been issued
on the 3rd. According to the libretto, (unspecified) methods for interjecting comic material to make
the work more lively (pit: vivace) and for engaging the eyes of the spectators (hallmarks of the Denzio
troupe) were employed. The cast is not identified, since roles were assigned at the discretion of the
troupe.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 615; Groppo 619; Wiel 269; Alm 769

 1727a La fama dell'onore, della virti, dell'innocenza in carro trionfante. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1727/5 L'incostanza schernita Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[INCONSTANCY DERIDED]
A dramma comico-pastorale Text by Vincenzo Cassani
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With Grilletta e PorsugnaccoTMTM and balli SORTING DATE: 1727-05-21
& Dedicated to Clement Augustus, Electoral Prince of Bavaria**!

Philander (Pio Annibale Fabbri) was voyaging abroad in search of amorous conquests when his ship
capsized off the coast of Kythera, where Aphrodite (Venus) resided.?* Supposing it to be an island
of shepherds, he was taken in by Uranius (Domenico Annibale) but made the tactical error of falling
in love first with Orsinda (Livia Bassi), the beloved of his host, and then with Corina (Giovanna
Gasparini; see below), the beloved of Daphnis (Antonio Pasi).

 L'incostanza was first performed on 21 May 1727 (A), the eve of Ascension, when it was received
with applause.* It appears to be the work in which Antonio Conti anticipated the debut of a woman
the likes of whom we have never seen. She is famous for her beauty and for her coqueteries.** Later
references suggest that the singer was Giovanna Gasparini.

OOv Cassani complained in the dedication that he was forced to reorganize the parts, cut entire scenes,
throw out the best arias, and make other compromises to accommodate the restrictions of time, the
wishes of the singers, and the music itself. A particular cause for eliminating scenes was to allow time
for the intermezzi, balli, cori, and other noble decorations ofa popular season. The brevity of spring
nights exacerbated the other problems, and he lamented the fact that all of these circumstances, which
rendered his work a sterile fantasy, might deprive the elector of his due glory. The fact that the work

24 Also mentioned in the Diario ordinario, No. 1490, p. 2.
250 Also, according to the Bonlini addenda, with Armiletta e Baldocco (La cantatrice).

25! Also the Archbishop of Cologne (1723-61). He was the son of Maximilian II Emanuel and of Theresa Kunegunda Sobieska as well as the
brother of the later emperor Charles VII. A recognized patron of arts, he authorized the construction of two palaces in Briihl.

252 In addition to being the legendary home of Aphrodite, Cythera/Kythera, an Ionian island first settled by Phoenicians but largely ruled by
Spartans in antiquity, was governed by the Venetian Republic from 1717 until 1797. Its honey was greatly prized. The setting also poses a
modern irony: among the recently discovered spoils of an ancient shipwreck off nearby Antikythera lie the remains of an astronomical calendar
with gears, dials, and hands used for tracking the positions of the sun and heavenly bodies as well as phases of the moon. The Antikythera
mechanism, as it is currently called, is by far the most advanced instrument for the measurement of time surviving from antiquity.

253 The opening date is also reported in NV, where the title is given as L innocenza schernita. The libretto US-BEu No. 298 was dedicated
on 13 Giugno [June], a date which probably refers to a reprise in Padua, where the 13th was the feast of its patron, St. Anthony. The Diario
ordinario (No. 1538, p. 16) reported that the final performance in Venice was on 1 June. NV (I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 178, f. 222v) announced,
however, that although the fair had concluded on the Sth, masking and theatrical activity would not cease until the 8th.

254 une femme qui n'a pas encore parii. Elle est fameuse par sa beaute et par ses coqueteries.... (I-Vnm, MSS fr. App. 58, p. 20, entry of

13 March).

1727/6

Xe)

1727/7

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 395

was revived (under the title Filandro) as a winter production at San Moise (1729/2) suggests that its
shortcomings were remediable. A setting by Porta under the original title was given in Dresden in 1747.
Arias in F-Pn; GB-Lbl, Ob [formerly in GB-T]

Listed as Bonlini 619; Groppo 623; Wiel 271; Alm 774

Albumazar Music attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
[ALBUMAZAR]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini***
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With a ballo* SORTING DATE: 1727-05-21

Without dedicatee

The Turkish ruler Albumazar was in port on the shores of the Aegean, where his followers made a practice
of luring ships and capturing their occupants. The envoy Alsakides was sent to make treaties with the
stranded princes of the captured ships. During his stay a storm caused the wreck ofa small boat carrying
the singer Cirilla, who was en route to Catania (Sicily) in order to appear in an opera. With her were
her parents, Pomata from Bologna and Maroca from Florence.?*

This musical satire (justly called a scherzo musicale in the note to the reader) was first performed on
21 May 1727, when it was received with applause (A, NV).** A license to print the libretto was issued
on 10 May 1727. Like L'incostanza schernita, it was variously reported to have closed on 1 (DO) or
8 (NV) June. Both works were received with full applause. Pomata sang in Bolognese dialect. His
imitation of his daughter's dancing enticed the king to take lessons. The king then enlisted Pomata's
help in carrying a love-message to Cirilla, but first he required his new emissary to dress as a Turk and
to learn a few words of Turkish.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 618; Groppo 622; Wiel 272; Alm 773

Le Srenesie d'amore Music attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
[THE MADNESS OF LOVE]

A divertimento per musica Text attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1727-06-01

Without dedicatee

This revival of 1726/6 played during the Ascension season of 1727. Since it is not mentioned by name
(in A, NV, or DO), it may have succeeded A/bumazar, with an opening on 1 June. Its run would have
been very brief. Le frenesie may have been the object of a reference by Antonio Conti to the prospect
of a species of comic opera...ofa completely ridiculous nature, in consequence of which. ..[itis] very
agreeable in this country, where they do not know how to laugh philosophically.?*'

?55 Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 206) considered the text of uncertain authorship.

256 Here a mock battle.

257 The cast is not identified.

258 Also cited in Benigna, Memorie, f. 32.

259 The discrepancy in closing dates may reflect a rotation from this to Le frenesie on the Ist, i.e., suggestions begin to accumulate that works
were given in rapid succession and/or alternation. The Diario gives the distinct impression on the 7th that the theaters had been closed for
almost a week. By the mid-1740s, rapid alternation between works was practiced not only in the spring but also in the autumn.

26 Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 206) considered the text to be of uncertain authorship.

261 1-Vnm, MSS fr. App. 58, p. 33; entry of 10 May. Buini's note to the reader said that the only purpose of the work was to distract the spirit

from worldly cares.

396

fi

 1727b
 1727
 1727d

1727/8

mM

rs)

TORE

1727/9

ioe)

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 620; Groppo 624; Wiel 273; Alm 775

L'unione della Pace e di Marte. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
Arianna. Cf. Suppl. 7.
Atenaide. Cf. Suppl. 9.

Il Bertarido, re de' longobardi Music by Giuseppe Boniventi
[BERTARIDE, KING OF THE LOMBARDS]

A dramma per musica Text derived from Antonio Salvi
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With La cantatrice;? balli SORTING DATE: 1727-10-25
Without dedicatee

Several accounts of the affairs of the Lombard kingdom after the death of Aribert had been given in
earlier operas. In this treatment, which is more fanciful than that of Flavio Bertaride (1705/8), after
Bertaride fled and was taken in by the king of Hungary, false rumors of his death were circulated.
Bertarido opened on 25 October 1727 (NV). It was still running on 15 November. A license to print
the libretto had been issued on the 12th. Filippo Finazzi sang in the title role, with Rosa Croce as his
mother (Rodelinda), Teresa Zanardi as his sister (Edvige), and Alessandro Veroni as his prospective
brother-in-law (Grimoaldo). One ballo was performed by Moscovites and Flemings.TM Corneille's
account (Pertharite, 1651) had been adapted by Haym for Handel's Rodelinda, regina de' Longobardi
(HWV 19, 1725).

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 621; Groppo 625; Wiel 262; Alm 776

Il regno galante Music by Giovanni Reali?
[THE GALLANT REIGN]

A melodramma per musica Text by Michel Angiolo Boccardi
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Serpilla e Pillone* and balli SORTING DATE: 1727-11-08

Dedicated to Antonio Ferdinando Gonzaga, Duke of Guastalla

In this tale from Greek mythology, after Theseus (Felice Castelli) killed the minotaur, he fell in love
with various Amazons, among them Anthiope (Teresa Peruzzi, La Denzia) and Thomyris (Rosa Giacinta
del Maino). The region around Themiscyre (Thermodon), where they lived, was then ruled by Orontes
(Margherita Flora), the uncle of Anthiope and husband of Thomyris.

Il regno opened on 8 November 1727. A license to print the libretto (for I/ regno delle donne) had
been issued on 4 October 1727; the libretto was dedicated on the 25th of that month. The virtuous
harmonies of the Venetian violinist Giovanni Reali, now maestro of the dedicatee's cappella, are cited
in the dedication as an important component of this poetic caprice, but Boccardi noted that dramatic

28 Identity unclear. See the note for Armiletta e Baldocco in Suppl. 4a.
263 Diario ordinario, No. 1607, p. 2.

264 Moscovites were present in Venice in unusual numbers in 1727 because they were recruited to build a new bucintoro for the doge. Central
and eastern Europeans found lodgings disproportionate to their numbers in parishes near San Cassiano. The choreographer for this dance was
Cosmo Damiani Tesi.

265 Reali was a noted violinist. His associations with San Moise and with the house of Gonzaga suggest a possible connection with Vivaldi.

266 The libretto for this work offers the rare instance of intermezzi being included. The performers were Rosa Venturini and Giovanni Michelli.

267 The duke had been in Venice in March of 1727 (A). Reali was listed in the libretto as his maestro di cappella.
268 Diario ordinario, No. 1603, p. 7.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 397

poetry was far from his ideal. It is possible that Reali's own playing concealed the barrenness of stage
and plot.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 623; Groppo 627; Wiel 266; Alm 778

1727/10 Orlando [furioso] Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[ROLAND IN A RAGE]
A dramma per music Text attributed to Grazio Braccioli
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With Serpilla e Bacocco SORTING DATE: 1727-11-15
x Without dedicatee
 This tale, inspired by Ariosto via the texts used at Sant' Angelo in 1713/5 and 1714/6, was recommended

in the libretto for its established reputation as an attractive entertainment. Orlando furioso opened
on 15 November 1727 (NV). A license to print the libretto had been issued on the 9th (A). Five arias
were taken from earlier works by Vivaldi,' but this version had little in common with Orlando finto
pazzo (1714/5).2

BS Orlando lent itself to the kinds of scenery with which Sant' Angelo should have been well supplied.
Alcina's enchanted palace, with its surrounding gardens and a distant view of the tempestuous sea,
was the centerpiece of Act One. The cave scene and the wooded countryside in which Angelica and
Medoro were to be married were important components of Act Two. The temple of Hecate, with the
statue of Merlin, dominated Act Three.

ee Despite its earlier success, Orlando may not have been well received in this production, since it was
succeeded on 10 December (an unusual date for openings) by a revised version of Vivaldi's Farnace
(1727/3). The principal singers in both works  Lucia Lancetti (Orlando), Benedetta Serafina (Angelica),
Anna Giro (Alcina), Maria Catterina Negri (Bradamante), and Casimiro Pignotti (Medoro)  were
relatively little known at the time. A revival was given in Brno in 1735 and pastiches based on this
version of Orlando were given in Bergamo (1738), Vicenza (1738), Este (1740), and Bassano (1741).

In all of these cases, extensive new material was added at the end of Act | and the beginning of Act
2.272

A Score in I-Tn;? aria in D-Hs
Listed as Bonlini 622; Groppo 626; Wiel 264; Alm 777; RV 728

1727/11 Arianna e Teseo Music by Nicole Porpora
[ARIADNE AND THESEUS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Pietro Pariati

i Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)

With a battle and balli SORTING DATE: 1727-11-22

26 Confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 1607, p. 2.

2 Hill, Orlando, pp. 331-6. The earlier works were Ottone in villa (Vivaldi's first opera; Vicenza, 1713), Orlando finto pazzo (1714/5),
Orlando furioso (1714/6), and Siroe, re di Persia (Reggio Emilia, 1727).

27! A libretto translated into German by Gottfried Benjamin Hancke provided the basis for an opera called Orlando furioso given at the Sportk
theater in Prague in 1724. Its production involved a significant number of Venetians, among them Antonio Denzio in the title role, Lorenzo
Moretti (Ruggiero), Gio. Battista Corelli (maestro de' concerti), Anna Maria Piccinelli (Melissa in the intermezzi), and Innocente Bellavite
(scenery painter). The music was by Gio. Antonio Bioni. See Freeman, Theater, pp. 235f.

2? Pancino, Le opere, v 6-19. Pancino (p. 7) also cites a pastiche version performance in Brunswick in 1722 with a German text.

23 This work gave rise to the conference report published as Opera and Vivaldi, ed. Michael Collins and Elise K. Kirk (Austin: Univesity
of Texas Press, 1984), to complement the Dallas production of Orlando furioso of the same year. The Dallas score was derived from the version
previously assembled by Claudio Scimone. It exerted much influence on the later San Francisco production, a film of which begat the DVD
(digital video-disk) currently available.

398

oo

ES EO

1727/12

WW

&
Oo

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Without dedicatee

In the strife between the Athenians and King Minos of Crete, the infant Ariadne (the daughter of Minos)
was kidnaped and raised as the daughter of the Theban prince Archeos. After an oracle told the Athenians
that their wars with the Cretans would end only if they placated King Minos, they sent seven young
men to Crete to participate in the games held there. The only means of saving them and the young women
who were sacrificed to the minotaur was to overcome the beast. Theseus took up the challenge in the
hope of saving the life and winning the hand of Ariadne, who was one of the hostages.'

Arianna opened on 22 November 1727 (NV). A license to print the libretto had been issued on the
13th. On the 29th Antonio Conti wrote to Madame de Caylus that [Antonio] Pasi (Alceste) does
marvelous things (faits des merveilles) but that a virtuosa from Bologna [Giovanna Gasparini, in the
role of the hostage Carilda] excels him, and, it is claimed, is in no way inferior to Faustina [Bordoni].
Conti also said that Nicolini? (Zeseo) at 75 was the greatest actor of our theaters, but [even though]
he speaks more than he sings, nonetheless he is greatly applauded, for he expresses all the passions
with vivacity.?* He made no comment on Facchinelli, who sang in the title role.

Conti also remarked that while he did not particularly like Nicolini's combat with the minotaur, he found
the horrible magnificence of the scenery, especially the labyrinth, well suited to the subject. The scenery
and its operation during the 1727-28 season were consigned to Sebastiano and Romualdo Mauro, who
in June 1728 appeared before the Council of Ten to reclaim debts owed them by Vicenzo, Antonio,
and Michiel Grimani. An adaptation of the same text was used in Handel's Arianna in Creta(HWV
32; 1733-34).78

Score (Act 2) in GB-Lbl (copy in US-We); arias in GB-Cfm

Listed as Bonlini 625; Groppo 629; Wiel 263; Alm 780

Farnace' Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[PHARNAKES]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Anton Maria Lucchini
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Advent (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1727-12-10
Without dedicatee

This revised version of 1727/3, which corresponds (approximately) to the UCLA libretto 779 (Autunno)
and to the score in I-Tn MS Giordano 37, opened on 10 December 1727 (NV).*!' The cast now included
Lucia Lancetti (Farnace) and Benedetta Serafina (Berenice).

Scores in I-Tn (Giordano 37)

Listed as Bonlini 624; Groppo 628; Wiel 265; Alm 779; RV 711b

274 Pariati had touched on related subjects in Teseo in Creta, one of the first texts he prepared after his appointment as court poet in Vienna
in 1714. The work was set by Francesco Bartolomeo Conti in 1715.

275 This date was anti

icipated one week earlier in the Diario ordinario, No. 1607, p. 2.

776 Juy tient teste, et on pretend qu'elle ne cedera point a la Faustine (I-Vnm, MSS fr. App. 58, p. 69).

277 Nicola Grimaldi.

278 Loc. cit.:...le plus grand acteur des nos theatres, mais il parle plus qu'il chante, neantmoins il est fort applaud, car il exprime avec vivacite

toutes les passions.

279 T.Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 44 (1725-29), Fasc. 1728, item of 30 giugno.

28 See also the citation for Benedetto Marcello's intreccio scenico called Arianna e Teseo (1727; Suppl. 7).

8! The date is also reported in the Diario ordinario, No. 1618, p. 10. Ina much more detailed study, Pancino (Le opere, iv) compares the
musical and textual materials from all known performances of the work.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 399

1727/13 Ormisda* Music by Bartolomeo Cordans*
[ORMISDA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
V1 Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1727-12-28~
si Without dedicatee
-

The Persian king Ormisda (Alessandro Veroni) intended to pass over his elder son, Chosroes (Filippo
Finazzi), in determining the line of succession in order that his younger son, Arsakes (Giacinta Spinola),
might ascend to the throne. Chosroes responded with military force. Although Corneille's model was
acknowledged, the work passed to the Venetian stage from Vienna, where Caldara's setting had been
given on the emperor's name-day (4 November) in 1721. Handel used an adaptation of Zeno's text,
with arias borrowed from Vinci, Hasse, Orlandini, and others, in his lost pastiche Ormisda (HWV A3;
King's Theatre, London, 1730).?8

 2 Ormisda, which was reported on 3 January 1728 to have opened in recent days,
have gone into production between the 27th and the 30th of December to avoid conflicts with other
openings and church feasts at the start of January. The title-page is dated 1728. A license to print the
libretto had been issued on 18 December 1727. The splendors of the Persian court were suggested by
depictions of the royal park, the royal harem, the underground temple of Mithras, and the royal baths.
Groups of priests and satraps as well as Persian and Armenian pages were employed in the staging.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 627; Groppo 631; Wiel 277; Alm 783

284 Would have to

1727/14 Amore e fortuna' Music by Giovanni Porta
[LOVE AND FORTUNE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Passarini
Mr Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1727-12-31
a Without dedicatee
Oo The infant Floridano, heir to the throne of Phoenicia, was kidnaped by corsairs as he was being taken

to Egypt by a nurse. In adulthood he was known as the royal painter Ismero. He fell in love with Arnea,
his long-lost sister, who now ruled Phoenicia. The cast is not identified in the libretto but is likely
to have included members of the Denzio troupe. Amore e fortuna was performed as the second drama
on 31 December 1727 (NV).*' The title-page is dated 1728. The original version of Porta's work had
been produced in Naples (1725). Passarini's text had been set by Baseggio for productions in Rovigo
and Dolo in the autumn of 1712. Among later settings of this popular work, the Jesi production (1733)
involved a Venetian cast.
A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 626; Groppo 630; Wiel 267; Alm 782

? Cordans (1698-1757), like Vivaldi, trained as a priest. In 1735 he became maestro di cappella of Udine Cathedral. He spent 1727-28 at
San Cassiano and passed two years (1730-32) at San Moise.

83 It is curious that Swiney sent from Venice a copy of the opera of Ormisda [Zeno's text, as set by Orlandini for Bologna, 1722] to London,
via Amsterdam, in March 1726 (Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 364). He commented that it would take more than 35 days to reach Amsterdam.

28 Diario ordinario, No. 1628, p.8.
85 The text is something of a mirror image of Cicognini's Orontea, set by Cesti in 1649 and revived numerous times.

28 See, for example, the listing for // regno galante (1727/9). Elisabetta Moro, who was active at Sant' Angelo, appeared in the Jesi production
(1733), which was directed by Antonio Galeazzi.

?*7 It is mentioned, without a precise date of opening, in the Diario ordinario, No. 1628, p. 8.

400

1728/1

1728/2

ry

Op

1728/3

mM

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Argeno Music by Leonardo Leo
[ARGENES]

A dramma per musica Text by Domenico Lalli
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1728-01-17

Dedicated to Cardinal Pietro Ottoboni, Nob. Ven.

In the basic outline of this plot the usual threads of power and love were entangled, but the figures are
unusually exotic. Argenes is a Chinese emperor who makes peace with the Tartars by arranging for
the marriage of his daughter Ianthe to the Tartar prince Zamir and of Camor's daughter Myrtena to
his own cousin Cambyses. A fter the plans are well underway, an oracle persuades him to dissolve them
because Zamir will betray him. The action takes place in Nanking.

Argeno opened on 17 January 1728 (NV),** the date of dedication of the libretto. A license to print
the libretto had been issued on 11 January 1727 [M.V.]. Argeno was produced in Naples in 1731. Owen
Swiney reported on 13 February that in both Arianna e Teseo and in Argeno Nicolino [Nicola Grimaldi]
performed [in the title role] with deserved universal applause and with more spirit than he did when
he was younger.* Other members of the cast included Lucia Facchinelli (Jantea), Giovanna Gasparini
(Mirtena), Annibale Pio Fabbri (Zamiro), and Antonio Pasi (Cambice).

The Mauro brothers (Sebastiano and Romualdo), who were responsible for building and moving the
scenery, were still unpaid by the Grimani at the end of June, when they appealed to the Council of Ten.
Score (Venice) in Lam; score (Naples, inc.) in I-Mc; arias in D-MUs; GB-Cfm, I-Vc (Naples, 1731)
Listed as Bonlini 629; Groppo 633; Wiel 275; Alm 785

Rosilena ed Oronta Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[ROSILENA AND ORONTA]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Palazzi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1728-01-19

Dedicated to Leopold, Count Paar!

Rosilena (Benedetta Serafina), the only daughter of the late king Artabanos of Persia, was taken captive
after her father's death by Arsakes (Maria Catterina Negri), the king of Parthia. She was saved by the
young Armenian prince Ormond (Casimiro Pignotti), with whom she shortly fell in love. He was the
son of the widowed queen Oronta (Anna Gird). When Arsakes discovered her whereabouts, he sent
his army to Armenia to recapture her. Rosilena opened on 19 January 1728 (NV). A license to print
the libretto had been issued on the 15th, and the libretto itself (I-Rsc) was dedicated on the 17th.
No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 630; Groppo 634; Wiel 278; Alm 786; RV 730

292,

Griselda Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[GRISELDA]

A dramma per musica Text adapted anonymously from Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

8 Title given as Argeno, re della China.

2 Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 381.
290 |_Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 44, Fasc. 1728, item of 20 Giugno 1728.

2! The count was an Austrian participant in the Pragmatic Sanction (1713) and member of the Order of the Golden Fleece.

2 Given as Artabeno.

2% Girard and Rostirolla (Catalogo) read the date as 11 January; Talbot (NGDMM/2) as 12 January.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 401

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1728-01-26

az Dedicated to Count Ottaviano Vimercati?TM

In this mischievous paraphrase of Zeno's text, Walter/Gualtiero (Filippo Finazzi), the king of Thessaly,
who had married the shepherdess Griselda (Rosa Croce), demanded that their daughter Oronta (Teresa
Zanardi) be raised by a friend under an assumed identity in Athens. Tigranes (Giacinta Spinola), the
son of Gualtiero's friend, fell in love with the grown princess, although her identity remained a secret
known only to Tigranes's brother Conrad. After Griselda gave birth to a son, Gualtiero, falsely declaring
the child to have been fathered by the cavalier Ottone, demanded the return of his daughter to assume
her mother's responsibilities.

Oo This production of Griselda opened on 26 January 1728 (NV), the date of dedication of the libretto.
The title-page is dated 1728 at top and 1708 [sic] at bottom. Zeno's text was enormously popular and
had been set more than a dozen times. It remained in circulation in diverse adaptations and settings
until the end of the century. Albinoni's setting had been performed in Florence in 1703 (see also 1701/5).
Orlandini's setting (1720/4) followed a premiere in Brescia in 1716.

A Arias in -MC
Listed as Bonlini 628; Groppo 632; Wiel 276; Alm 784

1728/4 Gli odi delusi dal sangue Music by Baldassare Galuppi (Acts 1, 3),
[HATRED DELUDED BY BLOOD] Giovanni Battista Pescetti' (Act 2)
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Anton Maria Lucchini
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Fat Week)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1728-02-04

oy Without dedicatee
oe) Owing to a shipwreck off the Adriatic coast, Evander (Anna Giro), the son of Mezentius (Gaetano Pinetti),

was raised as the son of Orestes (Andrea Tassi). Meanwhile Silvia (Benedetta Serafina), the sister of
the king Ascanios (Lucia Lancetti), was thought to be the daughter of Mezentius (who appeared under
the assumed name Asterio). Not aware of his true identity, Evander fell in love with his true sister, Turia
(Lucrezia Baldini). This pastiche opened and was received with satisfaction on 4 February 1728.7
Owing to the approach of Shrove Tuesday (the 10th), G/i odi can only have run for a few days. This
was the last production at Sant' Angelo involving Vivaldi (maestro de' concerti) until the 1733-34 season.
A Arias in B-Be; F-Pc
Listed as Bonlini 631; Groppo 635; Wiel 279; Alm 787

1728/5 Nel perdono la vendetta Music by Giovanni Porta
[THE VENDETTA IN THE PARDON]
A melodramma Text by Carlo Pagani-Cesa
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1728-05-05
rs) Without dedicatee
OO The Sicilian princess Alidea stood to inherit the throne from her late father if she would marry within

one year. Roland/Orlando falsely swore his love to her even though he preferred Asteria, the sister of

2 Not specifically identified, but a family of this name with interests in art and classicism flourished in Bergamo.

25 In the middle decades of the eighteenth century, Galuppi (1706-85) came to be one of the best known of Venetian composers. While vigorously
pursuing a career in Venice, he also spent periods in England and in Russia. At this time he was a little-known musician from the island of
Burano.

2% Pescetti (c. 1704-66), a harpsichordist and grandnephew of C. F. Pollarolo, was active in Venice through the 1731-32 season. Like Galuppi
a pupil of Lotti, he had begun his career composing the music for comic intermezzi.

297 1_Rvat, AS, NV, N. 179, f. 53, gives the 3rd, while the Diario ordinario (No. 1644, p. 3) gives the 4th. Generally, records of the Nunziatura
are more reliable than the Diario, but in this case the reverse must be true.

402

1728/6

1

A

 1728a
 1728b
 1728c
 1728d
 1728e

1728/7

rT

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Afranius, who was Alidea's other suitor. This run, which was intended to last fifteen days, opened
on 5 May 1728 (NV). According to the Diario ordinario, both this and Nerina (1728/6) enjoyed great
attendance. The work was presented in Trieste and Jesi by members of the Denzio troupe in 1732.
No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 633; Groppo 637; Wiel 281; Alm 789

Nerina Music by Antonio Pollarolo
[NERINA]

A favola pastorale Text adapted from Dom. Maria Creta by Domenico Lalli
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1728-05-05

Dedicated to Ferdinand, Duke of Bavaria

In this Arcadian drama, Tirsi (Gio. Battista Pinacci) loved the nymph Nerina (Teresa Peruzzi), who
was descended from the ancient inhabitants of Tegeia. She has fallen in love with the young warrior-
shepherd Alcasto (Gaetano Majorana). Meanwhile Idreno (Elisabetta Uttini), the leader of the shepherds
of Tegeia, was eager that the rule of the province should fall to his daughter, the nymph Silvia (Antonia
Negri), who loved Tirsi.2!

Adapted from the earlier Filindo (1720/6), Nerina opened on 5 May 1728 (NV). It was to run for fifteen
days, but the Diario ordinario indicates that although the Ascension fair was concluded on the 20th,
the last performance of both Ascension operas was on the 23rd. Nerina is likely to be the work
anticipated on May Ist by Antonio Conti because it would present a new singer of whom they speak
very highly....? The chanteuse new to him was apparently Antonia Negri, although Gaetano
Majorana (Caffariello) was the more significant singer giving a Venetian debut. Majorana, a pupil
of Porpora, was a graceful figure on the stage and his performances over the coming decades were greatly
lauded.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 632; Groppo 636; Wiel 282; Alm 788

Serenata near the Salute. Cf. Suppl. Sa.

Serenata (untitled) for the birthday of the empress. See Suppl. 5a.
Serenata (untitled) for the birthday of the emperor. See Suppl. 5a.
L' Adrasto. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Il sagrificio in Tegea. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Le due rivali in amore Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[THE Two RIVALS IN LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text possibly adapted from Aurelio Aureli
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)

28 The rationale for presenting a melodramma was that it suited the time and the theater. The cast is not identified in the libretto.

2 No. 1685, p. 6.

3 On the latter production, see Sartori 16353 and Gatti, Spettacoli, p. 37.

3! Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 857) equates the text with La Dori. See its entry for 1729. Groppo attributes it to d' Averara, but its close relationship
to II Filindo refutes the claim.

3 Diario ordinario, No. 1687, p. 2.

303 

...une nouvelle chanteuse dont on parle beaucoup... (I-Vnm, MSS fr. App. 58, p. 109).

3 This was her only appearance in Venice, at least under that name.

1728/8

Oe

1728/9

mM

ra)
4)

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 403

With balli SORTING DATE: 1728-11-06
Without dedicatee

This account of Paris (Angelo Maria Monticelli) on Mt. Ida and his conflicting obligations as a lover
of both the ethereal nymph Oenone (Paula Corvi) and her rival, the mortal Helen (Teresa Peruzzi), the
wife of Menelaos, opened on 6 November 1728 (NV*). Bonlini's assumption ofa relationship to Elena
rapita da Paride (1677/1; 1687/2) is strained. The character of the work is more suggestive of the
academic intermezzo II giudicio di Paride,* but it is not identical to any of these predecessors.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 634; Groppo 638; Wiel 280; Alm 790

Ezio Music by Nicole Porpora
[AETIUsS]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1728-11-21

Dedicated to the Count [Aloys Thomas Raymond] Harrach*

The Roman patrician Aetius, an illustrious captain under Valentinian, defeated Attila at the Battle of
Chalons (Gaul) in 451 AD. In this account, Aetius was unjustly accused of disloyalty.**

Ezio opened on 21 November 1728 (NV). The libretto was dedicated on the preceding day by the
impresario Domenico Lalli. Following a banquet given by the imperial ambassador, the dedicatee and
an assemblage of dignitaries including the French and Spanish ambassadors, the papal legate, and the
receiver of Malta attended the opening-night performance.* According to the Diario ordinario, Ezio
was received with universal applause. Nicola Grimaldi took the title role, with Domenico Gizzi
(Valentiniano), Lucia Facchinelli (Fulvia), and Antonia Negri (Onoria). On 9 December Antonio Conti
promised to send airs from the new work by Porpora to France.*" Metastasio's text formed the basis
for Handel's opera of the same name (HWV 29; 15 January 1732).

Scores in B-Bc; GB-Lam

Listed as Bonlini 635; Groppo 639; Wiel 274; Alm 791

Catone in Utica* Music by Leonardo Leo?"
[Cato IN UTICA]

A tragedia per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1728-12-26

Dedicated to Domenico Marzio Pacecco Caraffa*!

Having defeated Pompey, Caesar planned an attack on Cato, the ruler of Utica. In this historical fantasy,
Cato, unaware of her secret love for Caesar, wished to marry his daughter Marcia to Arbakes, the prince

35 Confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 1759, p. 11.

3 Cf, Suppl. 7. Rossi claimed a debt to Elena rapita da Paride (1687/2).

3' The count's father (Ferdinand Bonaventura) had held a post in the court of the emperor Leopold I. The son was on his way to Naples to
take up the post of viceroy, which he held until 1733, when he visited Venice. He was feted on the 20th by Andrea Cornaro, a former ambassador

to the empire, and on the 21st by Count Giuseppe Bolagnos, the current imperial ambassador to Venice (Diario ordinario, No. 1768, p. 8).
Hasse dedicated five works to this count, who became a great patron of painting, between 1730 and 1732.

3 The basic outline had been used by Morselli in L 'innocenza risorta (1683/4).

3 Diario ordinario, No. 1768, p. 9. The receiver of Malta was a diplomatic representative whose position was equivalent to an ambassador.
31 1-Vnm, MSS fr. App. 58, p. 154.

3!! With added arias by unidentified composers, according to the libretto.

3 A Spanish grandee.

404 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

of Numidia. Arbakes was Cato's designated successor. Pompey's widow, Emilia, schemed to recruit
Arbakes in an assassination plot against Caesar.'!? This second opera opened on 26 December 1728
(NV). According to the Diario ordinario,*"* it received maximum approval (sommo aggradimento).

@e Carlo Broschi (Farinelli) made his Venetian debut in the role of Arbakes, with Nicola Grimaldi
(Catone), Domenico Gizzi (Cesare), Lucia Facchinelli (Marzia), and Antonia Negri (Emilia). According
to the abbot Antonio Conti, writing on 24 November,''* the appearance of Broschi, who had arrived
by 4 December, would cost the Grimani immense sums. (Broschi's reputation as a virtuoso of acrobatic
proportions preceded him.) Abbot Conti noted that the Roman production had been given with great
applause,>" but that there was very little that was believable in the characterization.

- Handel, who is presumed to have gone to Venice in the winter of 1729 with the hope of recruiting Broschi,
was said to have been refused access to Broschi three times.*"' The composer produced an arrangement
of Catone (HWV A7) using Metastasio's text and most of Leo's music in London in 1732. Among
Vivaldi's lost works is a setting of the same text (RV 705) given at the Teatro Filarmonico in Verona
in May 1737.*'* Closer to home, Antonio Gori satirized the work in Le metamorfosi odiamorosi (1732/4).
Vinci's setting of Metastasio's text had been produced in Rome at the Teatro delle Dame in January
1728.

A Scores in B-Bc; GB-Lam;'? US-We; arias in GB-Lem; I-Mc, MAC, Vnm
Listed as Bonlini 636; Groppo 640; Wiel 287; Alm 792, 793

1728/10 Gianguir' Music by Geminiano Giacomelli
[JAHANGHIR]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli and abbattimenti SORTING DATE: 1728-12-27
& Dedicated to William Villiers?

Inthis story from Moghul history, the rebellious Jahanghir, the son of the emperor Akhbar/Acabar (1543-
1605), displeased his father so much that on his deathbed Akhbar wished to pass the throne to his nephew
Chosroes/Cosrovia. In this account Jahanghir, after contesting his father's decision, married Zama,
who had a daughter named Mirakha. Jahanghir arranged for Chosroes to marry Mirakha and manipulated

33 Metastasio's account is completely unrelated to Noris's Catone uticense, set by C. F. Pollarolo (1701/3).
3'4 Diario ordinario, No. 1786, p. 5.

35 T-Vnm, MSS fr. App. 58, p. 148.

3'6 Loc. cit. (...avec beaucoup d'applaudissement).

3! See the letter of 7th February 1729 from Rolli to Francesco Bernardi (Senesino) in Deutsch, Handel, p. 238, and Gibson, Royal Academy,
p. 283, following the account of Swiney. Five years later Farinelli joined the rival Opera of the Nobility in London. The production of Catone
had probably ended when Rolli's letter was written.

3!8 Heller (Cronologia, pp. 61f) says that a performance on 26 March was attended by Prince Elector Karl-Albrecht (subsequently Emperor
Charles VII) of Bavaria, who applauded enthusiastically. Unless the performance was private, 26 March seems a dubious date, since it was
the third Tuesday of Lent, while 26 May was the Sunday before a relatively late Ascension and thus a customary time for an Ascension opera
to have its first performance, but the work must have opened before that, because a letter written from Verona by Vivaldi on 3 May (loc. cit.)
suggests that it was already in progress. Vivaldi's 1737 production in Verona enjoyed great success. He promised Bentivoglio he would
produce another work with ballett for Ferrara, but he wished it to be given in the summer, when dancers charged less than they did during
Carnival (loc. cit.).

3! The copy of this opera in the Royal Academy, London (facs. edn. IOB, 70) contains cues by Handel from a London performance on 4 November
1732. Handel asked on 11 March 1729 that any mail be forwarded to him in the care of Joseph Smith (Baselt, Handbook, iv, 171), the English
banker who had taken up residence in Venice some years before. Smith, who became an extremely important patron of Venetian painting,
was married to the English singer [Mrs.] Catherine Tofts.

3 The designation Guglielmo Conte di Jersey Visconte Villiers de Dartmouth Barone de Hoo, Pari della Gran Bretagna in the libretto appears
to refer to William Villiers, the third earl of Jersey. Having inherited his title in 1721, he served in various court offices, such as that of Gentleman
of the Bedchamber (1733-38), to Prince Frederick of Britain (1729-51). His possible relationship to a Mr. Veilliers who was living in Hamburg
inc. 1698, when he fled with a prima donna to the court at Hanover (GB-Lpro, SPV, Ser. 99, Box 57, Broughton to Rabi, 18 February 1706-7),
cannot be determined.

On

OBE

A

 1728f
1729/1

i

fy
2

1729/2

m1

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 405

various aspects of their situation. The story, situated in Agra, was said to be derived from the
reminiscences of the Venetian cartographer Niccole Manuzio.TM!

Even though its libretto was dedicated on 26 September 1728 by the impresario Antonio Grossatesta
(giving the impression that the work would have run in the autumn), this first drama did not open
until 27 December 1728 (NV). The title-page is dated 1729. The text had first been set by Caldara, with
ballet music by Nicol Matteis, for the emperor's birthday (4 November) in 1724. Among its later settings
were those of Giai (San Giovanni Grisostomo, 1738/3) and Ciampi (San Benedetto, 1759).

Giovanni Paita sang in the title role, with Francesco Bernardi (Senesino) as Chosroes and Faustina
Bordoni as Semira. The Diario ordinario* reported that, like Catone, Gianguir was received with
all-round approval (comune agradimento). Owen Swiney said that Faustina gain'd immortal Honour
this Carneval, but Senesino lost much reputation in y [the] first Opera [Gianguir]; he recovered some
of itagain in... .y* [the] second [Adelaide].** Antonio Conti on 18 December praised the rapport between
the decorations and the representation of the entire work, found the subject pleasing, and suggested
that the role of Zama [Lucrezia Baldini] provided a [real-life] portrait of the Czarina. He also indicated
that the production was financed in equal measure by Faustina Bordoni and the painter Sebastiano Ricci.
Score in B-Bc; arias in F-Pc; I-Vqs (prima)

Listed as Bonlini 637; Groppo 641; Wiel 285; Alm 794

Music for the Albrizzian Society. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Doriclea repudiata da Cr eso" Music attributed to Giovanni Porta
[DoRICLEA REPUDIATED BY CROESUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Battista Corte*
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1729-01-05

Dedicated to Francesco CorrerTM

This drama, loosely derived from ancient history, involved not only Doriclea (Teresa Peruzzi) and Croesus
(Andrea Costa) but also Emirena, Arbakes, Pheraspes, and Solon. A second drama, Doriclea opened
on 5 January 1729 (NV, DO). A license to print the libretto (for J/ ripudio di Doriclea) was issued on
15 December 1728; the libretto was dedicated on the 29th; its title-page was dated 1729. Because of
poor attendance, the work was performed only three times.**' The work is more likely than the
performance to have sabotaged Doriclea, for only one casting change was made in its successor (1729/2).
No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 638; Groppo 642; Wiel 292; Alm 795

Filandro Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[PHILANDER]

A dramma comico-pastorale Text by Vincenzo Cassani
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

*! While dissolute in character, the historical Jahanghir (also called Salim; 1605-28) was noted for his aesthetic sensibilities. He built the Shalimar
Gardens in Srinagar, which might have been represented on stage in a more historically oriented theater but are unlikely to have been seen
in the San Cassiano production.

322 No. 1786, p. 5.

3 Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 381.
324 1-Vnm, MSS fr. App. 58, p. 148.

*5 Corte's identity is unknown, but random instructional words in the libretto are in Spanish. He acknowledges in the libretto that this was
his first literary work. It was also his only one for Venice.

326

Francesco Correr was the capitano of Padua from 1728 to 1730. He is named Francesco Corraro in the libretto.

7 Bonlini, Le glorie, p. 211.

406

OO

1729/3

OB

Ox

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1729-01-24
Without dedicatee

The presentation of this revival of L incostanza schernita (1727/5) during Carnival 1729 suggests that
its prior production as an Ascension opera was well received. The production opened on 24 January
1729 (NV, DO), when it was received with general enthusiasm (comune aggradimento).*** A license
to print the libretto had been issued on 18 January 1729. As L''incostanza schernita, Cassani's text was
to be reset by Porpora for Dresden in 1747.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 639; Groppo 643; Wiel 293; Alm 796

Adelaide Music by Giuseppe Maria Orlandini
[ADELAIDE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Salvi
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo and combattimento SORTING DATE: 1729-02-08

Dedicated to James, Duke of Hamilton>

Adelaide was the widow of the tenth-century Italian king Lothar, who had been murdered by Berengar.
She was rescued by the German king Otto I. The first Venetian performance of Adelaide was on 8
February 1729 (NV); the libretto had been dedicated on the 6th. The premiere performance had been
given at the Cocomero in Florence in 1725.3?

Inthe Venetian production the singers  Giovanni Paita (Berengario), Francesco Bernardi (Senesino)
(Ottone), and Faustina [Bordoni] (Adelaide)  were appealing.*** The performance was sufficiently
attractive to have pulled the audience away from San Giovanni Grisostomo at the end of Carnival (see
below). The British consul, Col. Elizeus Burges, wrote that y* [the] whole town is so taken up with
y competition between Farinelli [Carlo Broschi] and Faustina that we think and talk of nothing else.
Y lady's strength lies chiefly among y foreigners, especially y English and French; but y* Eunuch
has almost all y* Italiens on his side, a powerful band, and esteem'd by much y best judges of musick.*4
Circumstantial evidence suggests that Zanetti's caricature of Bernardi, who did not subsequently appear
on the Venetian stage, was based on his performance either in this work or in its predecessor, Gianguir
(1728/10).

Salvi's text formed the basis for Handel's Lotario (HWV 26), which opened in London on 2 December
1729. Vivaldi set the text for performance in Verona (RV 695) in 1735.35 Elements of the story are
still present in Giovanni Schmidt's libretto Adelaide di Borgogna, set by Rossini in 1817.

Score in GB-Lam; arias in F-Pn; I-Fc, Vqs (seconda)

Listed as Bonlini 640; Groppo 644; Wiel 284; Alm 797

8 Diario ordinario, No. 1795, p. 10.
3 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 457.

3 Hamilton had become a director of the Royal Academy of Music, London, in 1727 (see Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 30).

33! Handel could have attended a performance (see Paolo Rolli's letter of 25 January 1729 to Senesino reproduced in Deutsch, Handel, p. 235)
but only towards the end of the run.

32 Kirkendale (Court Musicians, p. 474) notes, however, that there were few items in common between the productions.

333 

...Si appegliavano (Benigna, Memorie, entry of 1 marzo 1729, f. 37).

34 GB-Lpro, SPV, Ser. 99, Box 63, f. 85y, letter from Burges to Charles de la Faye [the duke of Newcastle], 11 February 1729.

5 Vivaldi's setting of Adelaide was also given in Graz during the Carnival of 1739.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 407

1729/4 Semiramide riconosciuta Music by Nicold Porpora
[SEMIRAMIS RECOGNIZED]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1729-02-12
&o Dedicated to Sir John Buckworth***

In contrast to the earlier texts of Moniglia (1670/4 et al.) and Silvani (1714/1), Metastasio's account
centered on the selection of a spouse by the Baktrian princess Tamyris. The prospective suitors included
both Semiramis (here considered to be Egyptian), who was disguised as her son, and her brother Mirteos,
who believed Semiramis to be dead.

OO The Venetian production opened on 12 February 1729 (NV). Lucia Facchinelli sang in the title role,
with Antonia Negri as the princess (Zamiri), Nicola Grimaldi as Semiramis's estranged Indian husband
(Scitalce), Carlo Broschi (Farinelli) as the Egyptian prince (Mirteo), and others. The English resident
wrote to the duke of Newcastle on the 11th (see 1729/3) that Venice was so taken up with...y* [the]
competition between Farinelli [Carlo Broschi] and Faustina that we think and talk of nothing else.
Handel's Semiramide (HWV A8; London, 1733) employed this text but borrowed most of its music
from Vinci, whose own setting had its first performance in Rome on 6 February 1729.

A Scores in GB-Lam; I-MC (Acts 1, 2); US-We; arias in GB-Lcm; US-BEu
Listed as Bonlini 641; Groppo 645; Wiel 288; Alm 798, 799
 1729a L'abbandono di Armida. Cf. Suppl. 5b.
 1729b La Desdimona. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1729/5 Sulpizia fedele Music by Antonio Pollarolo
[SULPICIA THE FAITHFUL]
A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Boldini***
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With La cantatrice, balli SORTING DATE: 1729-05-22
& Dedicated to Countess Margarita Giusti Borra
Oo@ The love poems of Sulpicia (first century AD) described many years of happy marriage to Calenus and

included many references to sensual pleasure. This Sulpicia (Costanza Pusterla), a Roman noblewoman,
is promised in marriage to her countryman, the jealous Lentuolus (Giovanni Carestini), who poses as
the late king of Syracuse and is thus presumed to be married to Queen Ermesena (Rosa Mancini). Sulpizia
opened on 22 May 1729 (NV), the Sunday preceding the feast of Ascension. According to the Diario
ordinario, Sulpizia was intended to be the only work given at San Samuele during the fair of Ascension,TM!
but it may have had a poor reception, since it was soon replaced by Dorinda (1729/6).

336 Buckworth had become a director of the Royal Academy of Music, London, in 1723 and later (1736) served on the board of the rival Opera
of the Nobility (Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 28). He was involved in the collection of several scores of Venetian operas from the 1720s now
preserved in GB-Lam (see Mamy, La Musique, p. 380, and Gibson, Royal Academy, both relying on earlier work by Strohm). Buckworth's
stay in Venice continued until 6 March (see NV).

357 The scores in I-Nc and D-Dlb (facs. edn. in IOB, 30) are from the Neapolitan production of 1739 (Strohm, Opernarien, ii, 207).

338 Wiel (Teatri, p. 97) credits the text jointly to Lalli and Boldini, but no Lalli model is evident, nor is there a role for Sulpizia in any other
Venetian opera of the century covered by Wiel. Boldini, a Venetian of the cittadino class, soon became the manager of San Giovanni Grisostomo.
He served San Samuele (1733-34) and later San Cassiano (1736-37).

3 Cited only in Wiel, Teatri, p. 97.

+ The early opening, four days ahead of Ascension, may have followed on from the investiture of the new imperial ambassador. On the 22nd,
for example, he was entertained by the papal legate, and on the 25th both attended the opera together (NV).

34! Diario ordinario, No. 1846, p. 9.


408

1729/6

Fr)

 1729
 17294
 1729e

1729/7

QB

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 643; Groppo 647; Wiel 295; Alm 801, 802

Dorinda Music by Giovanni Battista Pescetti and Baldassare Galuppi
[DoRINDA]

A pastorale per musica Text attributed to Benedetto Pasqualigo*
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With La cantatrice and balli SORTING DATE: 1729-06-06

Dedicated to the Marchioness Vidoni*?

In this reworking of La fede riconosciuta (Vicenza, 1707),* Dorinda (Anna Bolognese), a shepherdess
from Delos, was abandoned by Silvio (Giovanni Carestini), a shepherd from Eleusis. After she stole
into his homeland disguised as Fileno, Nicea (Maria Cattanea) fell in love with her/him.

Dorinda opened on 6 June 1729 (NV).*# Received with all-round satisfaction, it can only have
tun for a few days. The Ascension fair closed on the day this work opened. The last performance of
Dorinda should have been on the 9th, since theaters could remain open for three days after the fair closed.
No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 644; Groppo 648; Wiel 294; Alm 803

Serenata (untitled) for the birthday of the Empress. See Suppl. 5a.
Serenata (untitled) for the birthday of the Emperor. See Suppl. 5a.

Il concilio de' pianeti. See Suppl. Sa.

La Dori Music attributed to multiple composers**
[Dori]

A pastorale eroica Text attributed to Pietro d'Averara
Performed at Santa Margherita SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Lidia e Ircano SORTING DATE: 1729-10-31~
Without dedicatee

In this revised version of J/ Filindo (1720/6; as Nerina, 1728/6), the nymph Dori was, among the
shepherds of Delphos, the last descendant of an ancient line of royalty. They proposed to elect her their
leader, but discovering that she was loved by both Cileno and Filindo, they agreed that one should be
her consort and the other their political leader. The cast members are not identified.

Although the date of opening of this premiere work for the Teatro di Santa Margherita is unknown,
the claim of its title-page that it was given in the autumn can be confirmed by the fact that on 16

3 Bonlini (Le glorie, p. 213) says the work was based on La fede riconosciuta, given with music by C. F. Pollarolo at Vicenza in 1707; cf.
E. Selfridge-Field, Marcello, pp. 251ff. Groppo (p. 128) erroneously attributes the text to Benedetto Marcello.

343 Perhaps Anna Vidoni Goldoni (1696-1730). He husband (Francesco Gaetano Gonzaga) was an honorary memory of the Venetian nobility.

34 The original version was set by C. F. Pollarolo. Sartori lists the libretto (9897) but speculates on Marcello's involvement in it. My own
listing of it in Marcello, p. 251f (as Z251) is also flawed.

345 The Diario ordinario (No. 1853, p. 2) reported that the work opened on the 9th, but in this case NV is more likely to be correct, since it
notes that the work was changed in coincidence with the reopening after Pentecost (5 June).

346 Diario ordinario, No. 1853, p. 2.

347 Although no score appears to exist, a score for the 1707 work La fede riconosciuta was found in GB-Lram a number of years ago. Both
of the Venetian operas in that collection are in fact from the 1729 Carnival period.

348 Antonio Pollarolo could have been one of those involved; see Nerina (1728/6).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 409

December five theaters closed for the Novena. If its schedule in 1730 resembled that of 1729, then
the theater would have opened around the end of October.** The work opened with a garden scene
dotted with fountains and statues. A woods was the backdrop of the second act. The large Campo Santa
Margherita lay south of the Grand Canal in an area increasingly populated by Central Europeans. Groppo
considered the theater to be of equal rank with the others,**' even though its existence was brief.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 647; Groppo 651; Wiel 296; Alm 806

1729/8 I tre difensori della patria Music by Giovanni Battista Pescetti
[THE THREE DEFENDERS OF THE HOMELAND]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Adriano Morselli
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1729-11-05
& Dedicated to the Ladies of Venice
 This heavily revised remake of Tullo Ostilio (1685/6) opened on 5 November 1729 (NV). Its locale

was erroneously reported to have been S. Jean Chrysostome.?* It was set against the background
of the war between the three Orazi brothers and the three Curiazzi brothers. Featured members of the
cast were Lorenzo Moretti (Zud/o) and Giovanna Gasparini (Marzia).

A Aria in F-Pc
Listed as Bonlini 645; Groppo 649; Wiel 290; Alm 804

1729/9 Belmira in Creta Music by Antonio Galeazzi*?
[BELMIRA IN CRETE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Girolamo Giusti
M7 Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1729-11-16
& Dedicated to the Arcadian Academy of Rome

OO Ormondos, the prince of Crete, visited the principal courts of Europe and Asia incognito. He ended
his travels on the island of Cyprus, where he fell in love with the princess Belmira. When, upon his
return to Crete, the prince declared his love for Althea (Maria Camatti, La Farinella), Belmira, disguised
as Argenes, led an army to attack his forces.*** Belmira was first performed on 16 November 1729 (NV,
DO). It was still running when the theaters were closed on 15 December. A license to print the libretto
had been issued on 7 November. According to the Diario ordinario, the work received general applause

3 Diario ordinario, No. 1934, p. 12.

35 The corporation which operated the theater had been organized in January 1729. See Mancini et al., Tatri, i/2, p. 32, citing a document
dated 24 January 1728 M.V. in which Fabrizio Brugoli is named as the impresario. This challenges Bonlini's claim (Le glorie, p. 215), made
not later than the spring of 1730, when his own work went to press, that the Teatro di S. Margherita had now been open for three years. He
acknowledged that this was the first work given there which was comparable to those performed at other theaters and therefore the first with
a printed libretto.

35! Groppo MS, p. 219.
382 Also Le Mercure galant, Dec. 1729, p. 2929.

353 Antonio Galeazzi, who is thought to have been from Brescia, seems to have had numerous intermittent contacts with Vivaldi. The dates
of a like-named person (1699-1731) seem not to be his. He was the first person to produce operas in Jesi (1732-33; see Gatti, Spettacoli, p.
32) and may have been peripherally associated with the Denzio troupe. Active into the 1750s, his major commitments were ultimately to sacred
music.

3 Describing the subject of his drama as one of the noblest ornaments of the world, the librettist addressed the pastori of this sublime academy
with great humility. He referred to the leisure of the current autumn as an enabling condition of his work.

410

A

 1729f
1729/10

1729/11

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

(comun applauso).**> Giacinta Rosalba Spinola sang as Ormondo with Anna Maria Mangani as Belmira.
Porpora later arranged a pastiche version (London, 1734).

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 646; Groppo 650; Wiel 291; Alm 805

Entertainment for the Name-day of the Empress. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Onorio Music by Francesco Ciampi***
[Honortius]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Domenico Lalli, Giovanni Boldini
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1729-11-27

Dedicated to Luca Casimiro degl' Albizzi*'

Ina plot said to be based on Corneille, the Vandal-turned-Roman general Stilicho/Stilicone (Filippo
Giorgi) had a daughter, Termanzia (Francesca Cuzzoni Sandoni), and a son, Eucherius (Castoro Antonio
Castori[ni]). Anxious for their futures, he arranged the marriage of his daughter to the young emperor
Honorius [395-423], whom he had served as guardian. His son had meanwhile fallen in love with Placidia
(Maddalena Pieri), the later emperor's sister, but there was opposition to the intended marriage. The
tension between these two marriage arrangements forms the basis of the plot. Onorio opened on 27
November 1729 (NV). It was still running when the theaters were closed on 15 December, by which
time it had enjoyed a total of eleven performances.*** Nicola Grimaldi sang in the title role.

Arias in GB-LbI (with sinfonia); I-Vqs

Listed as Bonlini 648; Groppo 652; Wiel 286; Alm 807

La generosita di Tiberio Music by Santo Lapis (Acts 1, 2),
[THE GENEROSITY OF TIBERIUS] Bartolomeo Cordans*? (Act 3)
A dramma per musica Text by Nicold Minato
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With Rosmene e Girondo* SORTING DATE: 1729-12-10

Dedicated to Antonio Rambaldo*!

In this revised version of Sartorio's Prosperita d'Elio Seiano (San Salvatore, 1667/2), Elius Seianus
(Agostino Fontana), who served in the court of Tiberius (Francesco Costanzi), was highly valued by
the emperor for having three times saved him or his effects from ruin. The story recounted here, based
on Tiberius's intention that Seianus should marry Agrippina (Chiara Orlandi), was invented. Many

355 Diario ordinario, No. 1921, p. 8.

356 Francesco Ciampi (c. 1690-1764) was a member of the Accademia Filarmonica (of Bologna) who worked principally in Massa and Rome.

357 The Florentine marquis degl'Abizzi is one of the subjects of William Holmes, Opera Observed: Views of a Florentine Impresario in the
Early Eighteenth Century (Chicago, 1993). Born in 1666, he was an aid and frequent companion of Grand Prince Ferdinand de' Medici (reigned
1670-1713). His father, Luca, had also been in the service of the Medici. Luca Casimiro's journals, still preserved in the Albizzi family archive
in Florence, provided the basis for Holmes's account.

358 Talbot, Albinoni, p. 196.

3 The Bolognese Lapis (fl. 1725-1764) was cited here as a member of the Accademia Filarmonica. Cordans was Venetian and later held significant
posts in the Venetian conservatories.

3 Cited as I! matrimonio per forza (Groppo MS, p. 220).

35! The count of Collalto and frequent patron of Venetian operas (see L amor di figlia, 1718, et al.).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1720-29) 411

complications ensued. Its odd (but common) mixture of history and fantasy may have resulted from
the publisher's intention to please dilettantes of musical dramas both ancient and modern.3

i) La generosita opened on 10 December 1729 (NV); it was suspended on the 15th for the Novena of
Christmas. The title page gave the indication Autumn 1729.
A No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 649; Groppo 653; Wiel 283; Alm 808

1729/12 Mitridate* Music by Giovanni Antonio Giai
[MITHRIDATES]
A dramma per musica (5) Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Domenico Lalli
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1729-12-26
a Dedicated to William Morris*

Mitridate was the last five-act work to be given in Venice through 1750. Pharnakes was the most gifted
son of Mithridates, the king of Pontos, as well as the step-son of Laodike/ Laodice. From her first marriage
to the elder Tigranes, king of Armenia, Laodike had three sons, one of whom had now made a pact
with Mithridates. In a subplot Eupatra, the daughter of Mithridates and Laodike, had been sent to Pontos
with the captain Gordias, but after the pair fell into the hands of Roman troops, Eupatra was raised as
Aristia, with whom the unaware Gordias, her brother, had now fallen in love.

QOL Mitridate opened on 26 December 1729 (NV, DO).* It can be verified from the Giustiniani accounts'
that this second drama enjoyed fifteen performances, which, allowing for religious feasts, indicates
that it ran until c. 15 January 1730. The dedicatee and other English gentlemen were still in Venice
on the 20th. The castrato Nicola Grimaldi sang here in the title role. Carlo Broschi took the role of
Pharnakes, with Francesca Cuzzoni Sandoni (La Parmigianina) as Aristia. The British resident, Col.
Burges, wrote on 20 January (apparently of this work) that Farinello [Carlo Broschi] draws hither
a great many Strangers to hear him. The Virtuosi do all agree there never was such a Voice as his in
y* world before; besides, he is young and a very good Figure upon y* Stage....

- Giai's was the third (revised) setting of Zeno's text. Best known for its earlier performance in Caldara's
setting (Vienna, 1728), it was last set by Sarti (Florence, 1779). The story traverses some of the same
ground as Frigimelica-Roberti's Mitridate Eupatore (1707/3) and Schietti's Laodice (1724/5).

A Scores in B-Bc, B-Br;*** GB-Lbl (London, 1736)

Listed as Bonlini 650; Groppo 654; Wiel 300; Alm 809

3 Carlo Buonarigo offered this note following p. 58 (the final page of the libretto text): Pud render sodisfatti li curiosi, e dilettanti de drammi
musicali, si antichi, come moderni di tutte le qualita. Agrippina, the second wife of Tiberius, was sent into exile in 29 AD.

> Giai was maestro di cappella in Turin. Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 600) introduces an interesting divergence in attributing the music to Riccardo
Broschi (Farinelli's brother) and the text to Gio. Pietro Candi. In his scenario the original setting ([daspe) was by Francesco Mancini and it
was performed at the Haymarket Theater, London, in 1710.

3 Baronet of Cornwall. The dedication discusses his lineage. He was the son of Nicholas Morris and Dame Catherine, daughter of the count
of Pembroke, and he was obviously still in his formative years. Lalli, the same dedication said, commended his proper dress and manners,
discernment of the sciences and arts, and other endearing traits.

365 Diario ordinario, No. 1939, p. 10.
36 Talbot, Albinoni, p. 196.
357 Loe. cit.

36 The indication Venezia 1733 in this source is erroneous (Strohm, Opernarien, ii, 207).

412 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1729/13. _L' odio placato' Music by Baldassare Galuppi
[HATRED PLACATED]
A dramma per musica Text derived from Francesco Silvani
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1729-12-27
& Without dedicatee
o@ The plot, derived from that of II duello d'Amore e di Vendetta (1699/10; revised as Gli sdegni cangiati

in amore, 1725/4), depicts the deficiencies of Rodrigo, who underestimated the cunning of the noble
Florinda, one of the many virgins he seduced. Gaining his confidence through a disguise, she enabled
the Moors to conquer the kingdom and kill Rodrigo. In this account, various details and. anew character
were invented. This second drama opened on 27 December 1729 (NV, DO).* The cast included
Casimiro Pignoti (Rodrigo) and Anna Maria Peruzzi (Florinda). The role of Rodrigo's general (Gernando)
was taken by Dorotea Lolli.

A Duet in I-Ba
Listed as Bonlini 651; Groppo 655; Wiel 306; Alm 810

3 1 'odio vinto dalla costanza, for which the librettos Alm 822 and 823 survive, seems to be an alternative version of the same work. Maria
Civran Labia was the dedicatee. The work was given with intermezzos. L odio vinto dalla costanza was also known under the title I trionfo
della costanza in Statira, vedova d' Alessandro (cf. 1731/1). L odio placato was the title of a prose comedy written by Massimiliano Pellegrini
in 1627 (see Riccoboni, Histoire, p. 172).

3 Diario ordinario, No. 1939, p. 10.

The 1730s: Overview

Ge Doge Giovanni Mocenigo's ten-year tenure as
doge (1722-32) was noted for its social excesses
YAKS and moral decline, the next two doges  Carlo
Ruzzini (1732-35) and Alvise Pisani (1735-41)  enjoyed
substantial diplomatic careers. Ruzzini was a negotiator of
European stature. Pisani exhibited a substantial interest in
public well-being. Some evidences of this were vested in
the Accademia Albrizziana and the Ospedale della Pieta.
Despite such investments, the declining influence of the Most
Serene Republic was increasingly hard to hide. Legions of
central Europeans arrived, while countless desperate
noblemen risked their dwindling savings on ventures in India
or the New World.

The decline in Venetian power generally and in the
lagoon's drawing power is apparent from an overall decrease
of twenty per cent in the number of operas given and almost
forty per cent in the number of meta-operas. In theatrical
affairs, the most consequential shift of the decade was caused
by the resurgence of comedy performed in a wholly new
manner  with music. Evidences abound that music had
played a minor role in comedies for a long time (Song and
Season, Chs. 4.1, 8.1). The question of authorship of such
works is a contentious one, since scripted comedy was still
arelative novelty. In contrast to opera librettists, comedians
were not accustomed to editing their works with a view
towards publication. Comedians were still engaged in
troupes, though audiences of the time began to single out
individual figures. One of the stars of Giuseppe Imer's troupe
was the young widow Zanetta Farassi Casanova (mother of
Giacomo). Musical satires of serious opera performed at San
Samuele gradually changed the course of Venetian opera.
Experiments with musical comedy inspired Carlo Goldoni,
whose later impact on Venetian theater was hardly evident
when he resumed residence in Venice in 1732.

Meanwhile, opera continued on its set course. The
composer who enjoyed the greatest respect in the 1730s, at
least at San Giovanni Grisostomo, was Johann Adolf Hasse,
a Saxon trained in Naples. In 1730, after extraordinary
successes with Artaserse (1730/7) and Dalisa (1730/8),
Hasse took the Venetian virtuosa Faustina Bordoni as his
wife. Bordoni's own successes in London in the 1720s and
her extravagant fees, in combination with Hasse's assimila-

tion of diverse musical cultures, rendered the pair singular
examples ofa rising synthesis of musical values which came
to identify European taste. Despite a subsequent 25-year
tenure in Dresden, the composer and his wife maintained
ties with Venice for the rest of their long lives. Hasse's
works were also well regarded in Vienna, for many were
on texts by Metastasio. The works also had reprieves in
London. Singers such as Carlo Broschi (Farinelli) and
Gaetano Majorana (Caffariello) competed for the distinc-
tion of singing the most difficult virtuoso passages in operas
of the time.

In contrast to the Hasse-Metastasio axis of opera, the
repertory of Sant' Angelo, which was equally active, drifted
towards revivals and pastiches. Its most energetic composer,
Vivaldi, spent more time managing touring companies
scattered from the provinces of northern Italy to those of
Central Europe, than at home. Apart from the faithful but
aging Albinoni, Sant'Angelo employed such novices as
Bartolomeo Cordans, Antonio Galeazzi, and Gio. Battista
Lampugnani. Among the newcomers, the one with the
greatest musical future was Baldassare Galuppi, who would
eventually become maestro di cappella at San Marco. Many
of Sant'Angelo's singers were, like Galuppi, Venetian.
Among its many economies, Sant' Angelo increasingly cast
women in male roles.

The spring season became entrenched in three theaters
 Sant' Angelo, San Moise, and San Samuele. Two spring
works of the decade stand out  the Hasse/Metastasio
Dalisa (1730/8) and the Vivaldi/Goldoni Griselda (1735/5)
 but each for different reasons. Dalisa, which starred
Bordoni, was one of the most expensive works, on a cost-
per-day basis, ever to be produced in Venice. Even so, it lost
money. Since the house was packed for every performance,
this indicates that at the wages it offered, San Samuele stood
no chance, ever, of making ends meet. Griselda represented
one of the few interactions between Vivaldi and the young
Goldoni. It was also the only work by Vivaldi ever to be
produced at San Giovanni. Memorable as Goldoni's account
of the interaction is, it appears that an important message
was left unsaid: either the working relationship was as
unacceptable to Vivaldi as it was to Goldoni, or the product
of their collaboration was poorly received.

414

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

354

304

25411]

O Sant'Angelo
O San Cassiano

20+]

| @ San Gio. Grisostomo
@ San Moise

15-41

@ San Salvatore |
O San Samuele |

1044

FIGURE 26. Productions by theater, 1720s vs. 1730s.

On balance, the reputations of the smaller theaters were
increasingly eclipsed by those of the star providers. San
Samuele was now the third most active venue for operas but
a distant one behind San Giovanni, which trailed Sant' An-
gelo (Figure 26). Activities of San Cassiano and San Moise
withered. The autumn/winter continuum developed a bipolar
symmetry insofar as comedy troupes gave great publicity
to their autumn opening nights, while the opera houses
trumpeted the last nights of Carnival.

| @ Other sf

The survival rate of scores (almost thirty per cent) is
improved over that of recent decades. In particular, many
works by Hasse and Vivaldi have been preserved. However,
statistics mute the role of extant scores from performances
given elsewhere and/or with different casts. Among news
sources, avvisi are preserved for most years. The residues
of many which are lost can be found in the Diario ordinario.
The quality of the papal legate's records declines, but the
quantity remains steady.

The 1730s: Chronology

1730/1 Li stratagemi amorosi

[AMOROUS STRATAGEMS]
A dramma per musica
Performed at San Moise
Without incidental items

Without dedicatee

Music by Tomaso Albinoni

Text attributed to Francesco Passarini
SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
SORTING DATE: 1730-01-04~

OROo

While Diomede was en route to her wedding to Prince Oristeus, her father, Evander, was killed. She

became reluctant to proceed. The resourceful prince employed a disguise and other subterfuge in an

effort to bring about the union and its amalgamation of two principalities. The work is faintly reminiscent

of 1700/8, also set by Albinoni.'

The work, which could have opened before the end of 1729, was running between 4 and 8 January 1729
M.V., when Anna Mangani (Diomeda) was unable to sing because she had German measles (rosolia).?

Giacinta Spinola, who, like Mangani, was from Florence, sang in the role of Oristeus. As Diomede,

' The tale of Diomede and Oristeus, derived from Virgil, had also been recounted in Giovanni Faustini's L Oristeo, set by Cavalli in 1651.

?1-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Beltrame Grigis, Busta 7540, entry of 10 dies Iannuaris 1729 [M.V.] enclosing a note from her doctor, Domenico
Casozza, dated 9 del 1730. The libretto heralded the fact that Mangani was protected by [Violante] Beatrice, Grand Princess of Tuscany. Kirkendale

(Court Musicians, p.

654) gives the dates of that employment as 1717-29.

1730/2

r

Op

1730/3

i

2)
roe)

1730/4

iM

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 415

this work was also produced in Este in 1731. Versions revised by various composers were given in
Bologna (1741), Hamburg (1745), and Copenhagen (1753). The singular virtue of Albinoni was cited
in a note to the reader.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 652; Groppo 656; Wiel 303; Alm 811

La fede in cimento Music adapted from Francesco Gasparini by Santo Lapis
[FAITH PUT TO THE TEST]

A dramma per musica Text derived from Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Melinda e Tiburzio SORTING DATE: 1730-01-15~

Dedicated to Antonio Farnese, the Duke of Parma

This partial revival of L amor generoso (Gasparini, 1707/13) is likely to have opened in mid-January.
The Bolognese Lapis seems to have been retained for the entire season by San Cassiano. The cast included
Chiara Orlandi (Alvilda), Anna Caterina Della Parte (A/dano), and Rosalia Bombacciari (Girita).
No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 654; Groppo 658; Wiel 301; Alm 813

Selim, gran Signor de' Turchi Music by diverse composers
[SELIM, LEADER OF THE TURKS]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Lucchini
Performed at Santa Margherita SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Ircano innamorato* SORTING DATE: 1730-01-22

Dedicated to Giorgio Querini, N. V.

While Siileyman ruled in the Orient [1520-1566], his son Selim feigned madness as a means of self-
preservation. Siileyman's sexual conquests were legendary, and in this work (loosely based on Ottoman
history) his abduction of Asteria, the intended bride of the king of Armenia, set the foundation for the
drama that ensued. By 1730 the Campo Santa Margherita had become an important, if secondary, venue
for Carnival entertainments. On 22 January a bull-chase took place there, and the date would have
been a natural focus (in terms of Venetian traditions) for the re-opening of this theater. The letter of
introduction was signed by Lodovico Pasetti e Compagni, the apparent operators of the theater.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 653; Groppo 657; Wiel 308; Alm 812

Idaspe Music by Riccardo Broschi'
[HyYDASPES]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Battista Candi
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1730-01-25

3 The duke died in 1731, leaving the Farnese line without a male successor.

* According to Wiel, Teatri, p. 102; it is not cited in US-LAu 812.

5 Armenian Christians were treated as a separate nation-state by the Ottomans. This plot can be clearly distinguished from that of Selim, re
d'Ormuz, a work given in Naples in 1712 (text by Gio. Domenico Pioli, music by Francesco Mancini) in honor of Camilla Barberini Borromeo,
the wife of the viceroy. Domenico Tempesti had taken the title role in it.

6 I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 180, f. 487, entry of 28 Gennaio 1730.

7 The Neapolitan maestro (c. 1698-1756) was the brother of the famous castrato Carlo (Farinelli), who appeared as Dario in this work.

 Probably revised by G. Conve and Silvio Stampiglia (that is, the text was derived from the one set in 1705 by Mancini).

416 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

oy Dedicated to Karl August Friedrich, Prince Regent of Waldeck
The story of Hydaspes, derived here from the text of G/ amanti generosi (1703/1), is derived from Persian
history of the fifth century BC. In this character portrayal, the Persian king Artaxerxes was a man of
singular prudence... .but secret vices. He arranged for the murder of his brother Darius. He and Hydaspes
were both in love with Berenice, who favored the latter.

OO Although announced for the 21st, Idaspe opened on 25 January 1730 (NV) with some applause (DO)."
Given that /daspe is known to have run between Mitridate and Artaserse,'' it can be deduced that its
thirteen performances must have occurred every night from 25 January through 8 February, excluding
the two-day closure for the feast of Santa Maria Formosa. Nicola Grimaldi sang in the title role, with
Filippo Giorgi (Artaserse), Carlo Broschi (Dario), and Francesca Cuzzoni Sandoni (Berenice). Domenico
Lalli was the impresario. Besides Vinaccesi's setting (1703/1),'* Candi's text had also been set by
Francesco Mancini as G/'amanti generosi (Naples, c. 1705; London, 1710").

A Score in A-Wn; arias in F-Pn; GB-Cfim; I-Tn
Listed as Bonlini 655; Groppo 659; Wiel 298; Alm 814

1730/5 L'Elenia Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[HELENA]
A dramma per musica Text by Luisa Bergalli
V1 Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1730-01-28
cay Dedicated to Teresa Buoncompagni Barberini, Princess of Palestrina!
KG) This account of the flight of Theseus (Casimiro Pignotti) with Ariadne (Anna Maria Peruzzi) focuses

much of its attention on Helena (Maria Giovanna Gasparini), who was to have been the bride of Theseus
but fell in love with Alindos (Dorotea Lolli).'> This third drama opened on 28 January 1730 (NV).
The title-page is dated 1730; a license to print the libretto had been issued on 15 January 1729 [M.V.].
Considering that a revival of an earlier work by Albinoni (1730/6) was mounted within two weeks,
it is unlikely that E/enia was well received.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 656; Groppo 660; Wiel 305; Alm 815

1730/6 Statira Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[STATEIRA]
A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno and Pietro Pariati
1 Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1730-02-09
& Without dedicatee

 Anton Ulrich's son had inherited his title in 1728 but would not assume rule until 1734. The principality of Waldeck lay between Westphalia
and Hesse-Nassau. After Carnival was concluded, the prince went to Rome, but he returned to Venice in May and re-booked his lodgings,
gondola, and gondolieri (Diario ordinario, No. 2001, p. 12).

' Diario ordinario, No. 1948, p. 9; No. 1951, p. 10.
" Talbot, Albinoni, p. 196.
"? Mancini's setting had been given in London as Idaspe fedele (1710).

'5 An unattributed work with the same title was performed in Naples in 1730.
'* The widowed princess, who had come from Vienna in late November with Marco Barberini, was staying at the Palazzo Ottoboni.

'S In Greek mythology, Ariadne's role in the life of Theseus was to supply the thread that enabled him to find his way out of the labyrinth.
The story related here could have debts to the triangular loves of Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream, in which Theseus plans to wed
Hippolyta, Helena loves Demetrios, and Demetrios loves Hippolyta. It is now considered likely that elements of A Midsummer Night's Dream
were derived by a circuitous route from Tasso's pastoral play Aminta (1573).

oO)

1730/7

m1

G

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 417

As in the libretto first set by Gasparini (1706/3), Stateira, the daughter of the late king Artaxerxes, was
expected to marry Arsakes, but Barsina, the daughter of the new king,' was also in love with the young
captain. This revival of the setting given in Rome in 1726, Sant' Angelo's last drama for the season,
opened in Venice on 9 February 1730 (NV). Maria Giovanna Gasparini was cast in the title role with
Casimiro Pignotti (Arsace) and Anna Maria Peruzzi (Barsina).

Score in A-Wn (Rome, 1726); arias in GB-Cfm, Lbl

Listed as Bonlini 657; Groppo 661; Wiel 304; Alm 816

Artaserse Music by Johann Adolf Hasse'
[ARTAXERXES]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio'
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1730-02-11

Dedicated to William Cowper

Artaxerxes (who was already dead in the concurrent production of Statira at Sant' Angelo, 1730/6) played
a pivotal role in this episode from ancient Persian history. His father, Xerxes, had been killed by the
ambitious prefect Artabanos, who hoped that disarray among the king's survivors would facilitate his
ownascent. While Artaxerxes had arranged for the murder of Darius (as in Jdaspe, 1730/4), he discovered
the plot of Artabanos soon enough to defend himself and the throne.

This well-received work, the first by Hasse to be produced in Venice, opened on 11 February 1730.
It can have had no more than eleven performances (fewer than the number of scores surviving, since
Shrove Tuesday fell on the 21st. According to the Diario ordinario, Artaserse drew the biggest crowds
and enjoyed the most praise of any work given in this season. The cast included Filippo Giorgi
(Artaserse), Francesca Cuzzoni (Mandane, his sister), Nicola Grimaldi (Artabano), Carlo Broschi
(Arbace), and Maria Maddalena Pieri (Semira, Arbake's sister). Col. Burges, the British resident, rated
Cuzzoni's the next best voice in Italy after Farinelli's and said she had the sweeter pipe of the two.!
The libretto for the Venetian production notes that in performance the work was significantly abridged.
Vinci's setting of the same text opened almost simultaneously (4 February 1730) in Rome. The broad
popularity of Hasse's setting is indicated by the rapidity with which it went into production elsewhere.
Within the year it was performed in Genoa, Bologna, Turin, and Lucca. It was revived in Venice as
1734/3; a revised version was also given in London in that year. Over the course of the next decade
it was also produced in Madrid, Graz, Ljubljana, Dresden, and elsewhere. Metastasio's text was longer-
lived than Hasse's setting and was set by Cimarosa (Turin, 26 December 1784) among others.

The season of 1729-30 may have been the most spectacular in the theater's history. The castrato Nicola
Grimaldi (Nicolino) received 12,400 Jire for his appearances in four works, of which this was the

'6 Called Cito in the libretto; historically Barsina was the daughter of Darius.

'' The long-lived Hasse, born near Hamburg in 1699, was an enormously productive composer. Trained in Naples in the 1720s, he collected
arange of honorary titles. He spent most of his subsequent years in Venice and Dresden. He served the Incurabili in the former, where he also
retired in old age, and was court Kapellmeister in the latter. He retained ties with the Empire also, particularly through the office of the Viceroy

of Naples.

' With revisions variously attributed to Domenico Lalli (NGDMM) and Giovanni Boldini (NGDMM/2), in neither case on certain authority.

' The (second) Earl Cowper had arrived by 20 January (GB-Lpro, SPV, Series 99, Box 62, f. 123, entry of January 20th 1730N.S.). His like-named
father (c. 1665-1723) was the first high chancellor of Great Britain and a prominent Whig politician. The like-named poet (1731-1800) belonged
to the next generation.

? Diario ordinario, No. 1961, p. 2. Bonlini complained in his final [printed] entry (Le glorie, p. 218) that the work as given was a long way
from Metastasio's original text.

2! GB-Lpro, SPV, Ser. 99, Box 60, ff. 123r-v, letter of 20 January 1730.
 Talbot, Albinoni, p. 202. The setting attributed to Handel (Arbace; HWV A10; London, 1734) consists mostly of Vinci's music.

3 Strohm, Opernarien, ii, 176.

418 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

last.* Carlo Broschi (Farinelli), noted for his enormous range and agility, was paid 18,600 /ire for
his appearances in Mitridate, Idaspe, and Artaserse. Francesca Cuzzoni Sandoni (La Parmigianina),
praised for her perfect intonation and flowing bel canto, received the highest sum of all  22,000 lire
for the season. She appeared in the same works as Broschi.* The pay for other singers, including Maria
Maddalena Pieri (Ladice) and Filippo Giorgi (Gordio), ranged from 2,800 to 9,300 lire. The
instrumentalists collectively received 11,266 /ire for the season, the dancers 7,93 1 Jire, and the comedians
13,516 lire. Metastasio was paid 3,300 lire for the libretto. English visitors were trying to lure Broschi
to their country, but he repeatedly declined on the grounds that the air should ruin his voice. Burges
wrote on 20 January 1730 that Broschi was engaged [in Venice] for three or four years to come.

&S A caricature by Anton Maria Zanetti of Francesca Cuzzoni and Nicola Grimaldi must come from this
season and could easily portray their appearances in Artaserse. Zanetti's portrayal of Broschi could
similarly be from this work or from Mitridate (1729/12) or Idaspe (1730/4). This series could easily
have been for an English patron.?

A Scores (1730) D-MUs; GB-Cfm, Lam, Lbl (2); I-Mc (inc.), Ne (2), Vmn; US-We; scores (Dresden,

1740): A-Wgm,* Wn; D-B, DI (2), Hs (lost), SWI (inc.); F-Pc (inc.); US-NH, We; scores (Naples,
1760): D-DI; I-Mc, Nc, P-La(2), US-We; arias and undated scores: A-Wgm, Wn; B-Bc; D-Hs, LEm,
LEmi; GB-LbIl, I-Mc (inc.); Us-NH; US- BEm, FAy

Listed as Bonlini 658; Groppo 662; Wiel 299; Alm 817

1730/8 Dalisa Music by Johann Adolf Hasse
[DALIsa]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Nicold Minato
im Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With Serpilla e Bacocco SORTING DATE: 1730-05-17
& Dedicated to Edward Coke*!

In this improbable mixture of history and mythology, the German emperor Otto (Angelo Amorevoli)
was about to marry Edith (Anna Gird), the daughter of the French king, Philip, when he suddenly fell
in love with the shepherdess Dalisa (Faustina Bordoni). This change of heart suited the ambitions of
Otto's younger brother Henry (Antonio Pasi).

?4 Some accounts mention only two works of the season, Mitridate and Didone, but in fact Grimaldi appeared in all four  Mitridate (in which
he had the title role), Jdaspe (in which he had the title role), Artaserse, and Didone.

25 See Mangini, Teatri, p. 143.
*6 See GB-Lpro, SPV, Series 99, Box 63, f. 123 (also in Hunter, Cecil, p. 46).

27 Copies of most of the caricatures of musicians are preserved in England. The series is ascribed to Zanetti in the Fondazione Cini Fototeca
but to Marco Ricci in the Courtauld Institute photographic archive. The production of Artaserse postdated Ricci's death (21 January 1730).
Ricci can be excluded also on the grounds that other figures caricatured appeared in succeeding years.

28 Facs, edn. in DMV, xvi.
 By Domenico Lalli according to most sources; by Giovanni Boldini, according to Bonlini (MS, p. 219).

3 Also known as // marito giocatore e la moglie bacchetone, this intermezzo is not associated with Dalisa in other sources, but a libretto (Sartori
21712) was published for performance at San Samuele during the spring of 1730. No other opera was produced there during this season. Balli
are indicated in the libretto, but Bonlini (MS, p. 219) says the intermezzi were given instead of the balli.

3! Thomas Coke, the earl of Leicester, who was a director of the Royal Academy of Music, London, in 1720, had both a brother and a son
named Edward. The salaries offered were uncharacteristically high for Venice and seem to have rewarded those performers well known in
England more handsomely than those of local repute only.

 Anannouncement ofa Catalogo di tutti li Drammi Musicali recitati in Venezia (i.., Bonlini's catalogue) appeared at the back of this libretto
(published by the bookseller Carlo Buonarrigo for Dalisa). A license to print the work (Le glorie della poesia e della musica) had been granted
on 29 April 1729. The suggestion of Bonlini (MS) that the text had previously been used in Vienna must allude to Minato's earlier work.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 419

OOE Dalisa opened on 17 May 1730, the eve of Ascension, with full applause,** two months before the
marriage of the prima donna (Faustina Bordoni) to the composer (20 July 1730). Bordoni, described
in the libretto as the new Siren, a Venetian mezzo-soprano of noble birth, [and] a true virtuosa of song,
was paid 5,625 for her appearance in the title role. Antonio Pasi received 3,000, Anna Gird 1,320,
and Angelo Amorevoli 538.TM After all other expenses were paid, a deficit of 2,000 remained.

fi Arias and duets in A-Wn; D-DIb, Mbs, MUs, RH, Rtt; F-Pc; GB-Ob; I-MC; US-FAy
Listed as Bonlini 659; Groppo 663; Wiel 309; Alm 818

1730/9 La Silvia Music by Bartolomeo Cordans
[SILVIA]
A dramma pastorale Text by Enrico Bissarri**
i Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1730-10-29
& Dedicated to [Franz] Joseph, Count of Czernin*
Oo In this pastoral romance, Mars/Marte (Antonio Gaspari), the titular deity of Latium, disguised himself

as Tirsi to win the hand of the priestess Silvia (Chiara Orlandi). Though calling herself Filli, she was

really the sister of Egisto (Elisabetta Perti), who used the name Nino and loved Nerita (Maria Mona).

La Silvia opened on 29 October 1730 (NV). The libretto, originally written for Vicenza (1710),* was

dedicated the preceding day. This and the following work would have been closed (if they were still

running) on 19-21 November for a three-day centenary commemorating the end of the plague in 1630.
A No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 660; Groppo 664; Wiel 302; Alm 819

1730/10 L/'inganno felice Music by diverse composers
[THE Happy DECEIT]
A dramma pastorale Text derived from Francesco de Lemene*!
Performed at Santa Margherita SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Lidia e Ircano SORTING DATE: 1730-10-29
a Without dedicatee

3 Diario ordinario, No. 1999, p. 9.

+ Other expenses were 2,380 for the instrumentalists, 2,888 for the ballet dancers, 1,553 for the engineer, 1,674 for costumes, and 3,720
for the intermezzi (see Mangini, Teatri, p. 124, and Alberti, Commedia, p. 32). There is no evidence of Faustina's noble birth. She was informally
adopted by a Venetian noblewoman, Isabella Renier Lombria, who paid the expenses of her musical education. The hyperbole may have been
generated by Venetian pride in Faustina's recent successes in London, fora large contingent of English patrons was on hand for this production.
Amorevoli, a singer in the ducal chapel, had sung in Rome during the preceding Carnival (1730); see I-Vas, PS, Busta 153, f. 117r. He was
granted permission to spend Carnival 1731 singing in Turin (loc. cit., f. 131v ). Bordoni was not of noble birth.

*5 A count from Vicenza.
*6 Franz Joseph (1697-1733), the count of Czernin, was the son-in-law of Maria Teresa Pignatelli, the duchess of Monteleone.
> Confirmed (as Livia) in the Diario ordinario, No. 2071, p. 8.

*8 The 1710 version was given in Florence at the Cocomero in 1713. An anonymous commedia pastorale on the same subject was published
in Florence in 1545.

* Cited in both NV (with an ambiguous dating) and DO, N. 2081, p. 2.

 The composers of the 1709 version were Gasparini and Lotti. While not identifying a composer in his main account (Teatri, p. 307), Wiel
(op. cit., p. 144) notes the involvement of Francesco Rossi in the version of 1726 (which, however, he misquotes as L 'ingegno felice).

*" The Lombard poet Lemene (1634-1704) was noted especially for his religious verse.

420 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

i) L'inganno felice, a variant of La ninfa Apollo (1709, Suppl. 5b; 1726, under the present title, Suppl.
7), opened between 29 October and 4 November 1730. According to the libretto a role was added,
several arias were changed, and the scenes were rearranged for this production.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 661; Groppo 665; Wiel 307; Alm 820

1730/11 Didone abbandonata Music by Domenico Sarri
[DIDO ABANDONED]
A tragedia Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Giovanni Boldini
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1730-11-24
a Dedicated to Gustavus Hamilton, Lord Boyne
 The text of this work had been set by Albinoni as 1724/12. Sarri's original (the music for which had

been composed for a Neapolitan production in February 1724) had its Venetian premiere on 24
November 1730 (NV). The dedicatee was in Venice at the time of this opening.**

Oe Metastasio's original text and Sarri's setting of it had been praised in 1724 for the composition of the
words, being by a famous author, and for the music of the maestro di cappella Domenico Sarro. Also
cited were the virtuosi who perform, among whom may be distinguished the Cavalier Nicola Grimaldi,
cast as Aeneas, whom he represents marvelously; the virtuosa Marianna Benti Bulgarelli, detta la
Romanina, who takes the part of Dido; and the virtuosa Antonia Merighi, who takes the part of Iarbas,
the king of the Moors ....' The first two of these singers had appeared in Albinoni's setting (1724/12).
Grimaldi was the only survivor in the 1730 Venetian production from the original Neapolitan cast. Lucia
Facchinelli now took the role of Dido, with Antonio Barbieri as Iarbas.

A Score in I-Ne*

Listed as Didone 662; Groppo 666; Wiel 297; Alm 821

1731/1 Il trionfo della costanza in Statira, Music by Antonio Galeazzi

vedova d' Alessandro Text adapted from Francesco Silvani by Bart. Vitturi
[THE TRIUMPH OF CONSTANCY AS EXEMPLIFIED IN STATEIRA, THE WIDOW OF ALEXANDER]
A dramma per musica

11 Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Pollastrella e Parpagnacco;* Rosmene e Girondo SORTING DATE: 1731-01-04~
& Without dedicatee

* Diario ordinario, No. 2071, p. 8.

 The second viscount Boyne (1710-46) traveled in Italy with several other gentleman and sailed from Venice in April 1731 for Malta and
Spain. A painting by Bartolomeo Nazzari, now in the Maritime Museum at Greenwich, shows him and two companions (one possibly being
Walpole; see 1731/2) planning their travels.

 Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 325) gives 6 January 1724 for the opening of Sarri's work. Albinoni set the same text for a production in Venice
in December of that year.

5 GB-Lpro, SPV Series 99, Box 63, f 147v. However, he had also been there in the preceding winter (op. cit., f. 123). The intervening year
had been spent seeing all the great towns of Italy. With [Edward] Walpole he had arrived in Padua on 3 November.

 Griffin Doc. 504, entry of 8 Febbrajo 1724 concerning the preceding Wednesday, ... per la composizione delle parole, essendo di celebre
autore, e per la musica del maestro di cappella Domenico Sarro, come anche per li virtuosi, che la rappresentano, fra quali si destinguono il
Cavalier Niccole Grimaldi, che fa la parte di Enea, che la rappresenta a meraviglia; la virtuosa Marianna Benti Bulgarelli, detta la Romanina,
che fa la parte di Didone, e la Virtuosa Antonia Merighi, che fa la parte di Iarbo Re de' Mori.

* With additions by Galuppi (Strohm, Opernarien, ii, 220).

48ie., Lastrologo. Wiel (Teatri, p. 106) lists both works, Groppo only L astrologo, and Bonlini (MS, p. 221) says that the second was substituted
for the first, which was not well received.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 421

The enormous jealousy existing between Stateira and Barsina, the wives of the late Alexander the Great,
was explored in this revised version of La costanza combattuta in amore (1716/6). The high-born Stateira
was the daughter of Darius, the king of Persia, while Barsina, the daughter of a vassal of Darius, was
of lower birth.* It was Barsina who prevailed in a contest for the interests of the royal prince Leonatus.
She bore Alexander's (last) child, whose entry into the world prompted the need to reconsider the division
of Alexander's conquered lands.*

e The casting of Maria Giovanna Gasparini (Statira) and Rosa Maddalena Cardina (Barsina) suggests
the possibility that in its actual staging J/ trionfo could have been understood to represent the long-
standing competition between Bolognese and Venetian singers at Sant'Angelo. The well-known
Gasparini, from Bologna, enjoyed the patronage of Philip, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt. The Venetian
Cardina, who subsequently was cast in male roles, was appearing in her first season.

 The date offered is speculative, since no documentation for the performance has come to light. The
topic would have suited any part of the winter season, which was curiously devoid of St. Stephen's
openings, even though it was constrained by a relatively early date for Shrove Tuesday (13 February).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 667; Groppo 671; Wiel 319; Alm 827!

1731/2 Massimiano Music by Giuseppe Maria Orlandini
[MAXIMINUS]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1731-01-06~
a Dedicated to Edward Walpole

Maximinus, the emperor of Rome from 235 to 238, consolidated the peace begun under Diocletian,
in whose name he built the great baths near what is now the Piazza della Repubblica. In this account
(derived from 1711/7*), Maximinus had renounced the throne, but the current emperor, Constantine,
had married his daughter, Fausta, to advance his own political agenda. Maximinus then attempted to
persuade Fausta to betray her husband.**

@ This second drama opened onc. 6 January 1731 (NV),* but since the 6th was the feast of Epiphany
and theaters were also closed on the 8th, the actual date is more likely to have been the Sth or the 9th.
The winter season of 1731 was a lackluster one. There were no openings in December 1730 and those
of January caused little comment. Venice, Austria, and Saxony were preoccupied with the threat of
war to the east. Nicola Grimaldi sang in the title role, with Antonio Barbieri (Costantino) and Lucia
Facchinelli (Fausta). The libretto noted that the scenery painters and engineers were the brothers Giuseppe
and Domenico Valeriani from Bavaria.

* At least in Vitturi's revised account. The contrast of social classes was not a prominent part of Silvani's libretto (1716/6).
* The libretto credits the story to Pradon but acknowledges that it has been adapted to the Italian musical theater.

5! This libretto corresponds to Sartori 23775 (iI trionfo della costanza in Statira, vedova d'Alessandro), not to 23768 (II trionfo della costanza;
cf. Suppl. 3a), which has a different cast and lacks a date. The libretto in US-LAu is of this work, not of 23768.

* Son of Robert Walpole. He had been in Venice during the preceding winter. He may have been among the milordi inglesi reported to
have recently arrived in the Diario ordinario report for 9 December 1730 (No. 2087, p. 3). Art-historical notes in the Greenwich Museum
also link Sir Francis Dashwood, Lord Middlesex [Charles Sackville, 1711-69], and the third earl of Carlisle [Charles Howard, 1669-1738]with
this tour.

*3 Massimiano shared roughly half its content with Gasparini's Costantino. Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 788) cites revisions by Giovanni Boldini.
Bonlini credits revisions to Boldini in print but cites Pariati as one of the authors in manuscript (Bonlini MS, 220).

54 Maximinus was killed in Aquileia in 238 AD. The text and a few of Orlandini's arias were used as the basis of a pastiche given in Florence
in 1751 (Kirkendale, Court Musicians, p. 515).

55 The date is deduced from the phrase nel fine della scorsa settimana in a report dated 13 Gennaro 1731.

422

1731/3

Op,

1731/4

m1

OB

1731/5

i

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Score in B-Bc; arias in GB-Lgc
Listed as Bonlini 664; Groppo 668; Wiel 312; Alm 824

Romilda Music by Bartolomeo Cordans
[ROMILDA]

A dramma per musica Text by Carlo Pagani-Cesa
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With // vecchio pazzo in amore SORTING DATE: 1731-01-06~

Dedicated to Marquis Scipione Sacrati*'

Romilda (Chiara Orlandi), the widow of Alkhan (Antonio Gaspari), the king of the Huns, led a reclusive
life in a castle on the edge of the sea near Aquileia. Her daughter Agila (Maria Mona), who remained
at home, fell in love with Siegfried (Cecilia Delfini), a prisoner in the castle, but Siegfried turned out
to be her brother Rodewald in disguise. Romilda, which opened on c. 6 January 1731 (NV),* enjoyed
much applause.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 665; Groppo 669; Wiel 314; Alm 825

Armida al campo d'Egitto Music attributed to Antonio Vivaldi
[ARMIDE IN CAMP OF THE EGYPTIANS]

A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Palazzi
Performed at Santa Margherita SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Lidia e Ircano SORTING DATE: 1731-01-20~
Without dedicatee

Palazzi explains in his preface that in honoring the enduring drama of a famous poet [Tasso], he has
preserved the place and the principal characters but has diversified the story of Armide. Although
it cannot be determined exactly when this revival of 1719/7 opened, the model of the preceding year
together with the knowledge that this was a year with a very short Carnival season suggest an opening
in mid-January 1731. The second and third acts were significantly shortened from the 1719 version.

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 666; Groppo 670; Wiel 322; Alm 826; RV 699

L'odio vinto dalla costanza Music adapted from Antonio Vivaldi
[HATRED CONQUERED BY CONSTANCY] by Antonio Galeazzi
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Antonio Marchi by Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

 Groppo MS, p. 225. See also Sartori 24393.

57 Romilda appears to have honored the wedding of Maria Olimpia Sacrati, the marquis's niece, to Count Alessandro Fiaschi. These nipoti
sposi are mentioned among the dedicatees in the libretto.

58 The work is reported as Romelia (I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 182, f. 226v), but the opening date is likely to have been the Sth or the 9th (see the
comment for 1731/2).

5 Bonlini (MS, p. 220).

 Bonlini MS; Wiel (Zeatri, p. 107). Groppo (MS, p. 477) gives the earlier variant, /rcano innamorato.

' See Pancino, Le opere, ii, 36. Portions of the score for earlier and later versions survive.

 The work may have involved additional composers. Galeazzi was from Brescia.

 L odio vinto marked Vitturi's earliest known association with the Venetian theater. He was active until 1753.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 423

With Melinda, changed to Rosmene e GirondoTM SORTING DATE: 1731-01-25~
res Dedicated to Maria Civran Labia
OOo L'odio vinto had been given twice previously at San Moise  as La costanza trionfante degli amori

e degli odi (1716/3) and as Artabano, re de' Parti (1719/2). A license to print the libretto was issued

on 24 January 1731 and an opening shortly thereafter is probable. Three of the principal roles 

Artabano, Doriclea, and Eumena  were taken by performers (Margherita Perini, Maria Giovanna

Gasparini, and Maddalena Zannucchi) in the service of Prince Philip of Hesse-Darmstadt. The work's

continuing popularity can be inferred from revivals of this version in Parma, Bologna, and Graz in 1739.
A No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 663; Groppo 667; Wiel 318; Alm 822, 823; RV Anh. 51

1731/6 Siroe, re di Persia Music by Leonardo Vinci
[SIROES, KING OF PERSIA]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio, rev. Giovanni Boldini
rd Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1731-01-27
& Dedicated to Antonio Maria Salviati
oo This third drama, a revival of 1726/2, opened on 27 January 1731 (NV). The opening scene took

place in a temple of the Sun. The cast included Antonio Barbieri (Cosroe), Nicola Grimaldi (Siroe),
Francesco Bilanzoni (Medarse), and Lucia Facchinelli (Emira). Only Grimaldi was retained from the
earlier cast.

fi Score (Venice, 1726) in D-MUs; GB-Cfm, Lam, Lem; arias (Galuppi) in F-Pn; I-CF, Rsc
Listed as Bonlini 668; Groppo 672; Wiel 311; Alm 829

1731/7 Li sponsali d'Enea Music attributed to Bartolomeo Cordans
[THE WEDDING OF AENEAS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Passarini, rev. Gio. Boldini
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With Pericca e Varrone SORTING DATE: 1731-05-02
& Dedicated to Prince Friedrich, Duke of Wiirttemberg!
o@ After the destruction of Troy, Aeneas planned to marry Lavinia, the daughter of a Latin king. By the

time he arrived, however, Lavinia was engaged to Turnus, the king of the Rutulians, who were enemies
of the Trojans. Aeneas resorted to trickery: he disguised himself as the emissary Kleartes/Clearte, and

* Melinda [e Flemma] is cited in connection with L odio vinto dalla costanza in Sartori 15402 and by Wiel (Teatri, p. 106). Groppo (MS,
p. 226) cites instead Pollastrella e Parpagnacco with a change to Rosmene e Girondo. Bonlini (MS, p. 218) cites Melinda only.

6 The Civran and Labia families were both in the Venetian nobility. Pietro Civran, whose relationship (if any) to the dedicatee is unknown,
had been the Venetian envoy to Constantinople during a period of frayed relations c. 1680.

 According to the libretto, the drama was derived from Pradon [Jacques Pradon, 1632-98].
7 With new arias by G. B. Pescetti and B. Galuppi. The text was also revised by the addition of a role for Arbaces.

 Specific identity unknown. The Duke and Duchess Salviati were staying with the princess of Palestrina, as were some of the English gentlemen
currently in town (Diario ordinario, No. 2087, p. 3).

 Sometimes (following Cendoni's revisions to Allacci) attributed to Michele Fini, who composed the music for the intermezzo.
 Cited by Wiel, but it may instead belong with 1731/8.

' Prince Friedrich (1698-1731) was the only son of Johanna Elisabetta, the princess of Baden-Durlach, and the enlightened duke of Wiirttemberg,
Eberhard Louis (1697-1733). The Ludwigsburg palace was an artifact of his reign. He admitted many French Huguenot refugees, who brought
textile manufacture to the Stuttgart region.

424 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Lavinia fell in love with this assumed personality. Li sponsali opened on 2 May 1731 (NV), the eve
of Ascension, when, like the two following works, it met with full applause.* A license to print the
libretto had been issued on 28 April. The cast included Elisabetta Moro (Enea), Maria Giovanna Gasparini
(Lavinia), and Filippo Galetti (Turno).

A Aria in US-FAy
Listed as Bonlini 670; Groppo 674; Wiel 320; Alm 831

 1731a Trattenimento musicale a 4. Cf. Suppl. 7.
1731/8 Artanaganamenone Music attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
[ARTANAGANAMENONE]
A dramma tragichissimissimo Text attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With Perrica e Varrone (?) SORTING DATE: 1731-05-02
a Without dedicatee
Oo Modeled on the spirited idea of the [spoken] tragedy Rutzvanscad il giovine (Suppl. 3a), the text was

a satire on plots claiming a foundation in ancient history. Malmocor, the tyrannical king of the Arabian
desert, sent his general Ormondonopalach to defeat Sardanapalapeo. The general took Miradaclea, the
wife of Sardanapalapeo, and her infant son, Artanaganamenone, as hostages. This dramma
tragichissimissimo for the fair of Ascension opened on 2 May 1731 with full applause. It had been
given three years earlier in Bologna under the title Malmocor. A sequel concerning the lives of the same
figures was produced at Sant'Angelo as JI re dispietato (1747/11).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 671; Groppo 675; Wiel 316; Alm 832

1731/9 Venere placata Music by Frangois Courcelle
[VENUS PLACATED]
A dramma per musica Text by Claudio Nicola Stampa
M7 Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1731-05-02
& Dedicated to [prince] Ferdinand Lothar of Metternich

Spinning fantasy from Adriatic mythology, the libretto relates that a magnificent temple, sacred to Venus,
arose on the Venetian shore. This frustrated Neptune (Giovanni Carestini), who, being unable to seduce
the beautiful nymph Adria (Anna Maria Peruzzi), disguised himself as the shepherd Amyntas. Each
year when one of the many foreigners who frequented the shore was sacrificed to Cynthia, the act was

 Goldoni's Enea in Lazio is an elaboration of the same plot. Bonlini (MS, p. 221) indicates that Maccari set the same text to music for performance
in Treviso some years earlier, but no libretto from such a performance survives. (Quadrio maintained in 1744 that the music for the present
work was by Giacomo Maccari [see Della Seta, Relator, p. 83].)

 Diario ordinario, No. 2149, p. 8.

TM Alm and her predecessors credit Buini with the music. The work is listed (conjecturally) under Bartolomeo Cordans's name in NGDMM/2,
apparently because he had some association with the theater during this season. The character of the work is much more suggestive of Buini
than of Cordans.

*5 Cited in the Bonlini foglio volante only. N.B. its association with the preceding work (1731/7) by Wiel.

6 The origin of the work is credited to Chapter 000 of a book entitled Jmaginary Stories. At the end of the work only Ormondonopalach
survived. He wished to die in his bed rather than on the stage, so the prompters were instructed to recite the closing verses.

7 Diario ordinario, No. 2149, p. 8.

78 Courcelle (1705-78) was born to French parents in the service of the Farnese court. He served as maestro di cappella at the court of Parma
(1727-33) but later moved to Spain.

 Although the dedicatee is identified as a baron, Ferdinand Lothar von Metternich (1710-53) was the eighth child of the sitting baron, Karl
Kaspar Hugo, who was baron from 1711 to 1738.

1731/10

Op,

fi

 1731b
 1731c
 1731d

1731/11

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 425

committed in the name of a foreign shepherd. The plot became more complicated when Eurilla
(Catterina Visconti), the daughter of Cynthia's priest (Francesco Maria Venturini), fell in love with
Aminta.

Venere placata opened on 2 May 1731 (NV) with full applause. Stampa's contribution may have
amounted to little more than substituting shepherds for fisherman in the Venetian ecloga pescatoria,
a staple of improvised comedy (cf. Imer's Introduzione of 1726 and Goldoni's Fondazione of 1736,
both in Suppl. 3a).

Score (inc.) in D-Bds; arias in I-Vqs

Listed as Bonlini 669; Groppo 673; Wiel 321; Alm 830

Fidarsi e bene, Music attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini*

ma non fidarsi e meglio
[To BE FAITHFUL IS GOOD, BUT TO BE UNFAITHFUL IS BETTER]

A divertimento comico Text attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1731-05-09~
Without dedicatee

Fidarsi may be indebted to the comic intermezzi of Polissena vedova e Don Chilone filosofo (1722).*!
Here the roles were for the widow Rosilda, her servant Dorisbe, and the hypocritical philosopher Zenone.
The action took place in a countryside with a view of a palazzo. The libretto indicates that the work
was intended for the Ascension fair. That only the opening of Artanaganamenone (1731/8; 2 May)
can be confirmed for this season could indicate that this work succeeded it a week later, that the two
works played in alternation, or that Artanaganamenone was so popular that Fidarsi was not given.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 672; Groppo 676; Wiel 315; Alm 833

Veneia. Cf. Suppl. 1.
Il trionfo in costanza. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Kandahar, re nell' Indie. Cf. Suppl. 3b.

Annibale Music by Nicol Porpora
[HANNIBAL]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Filippo Vanstryp
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With Scintilla e Tabarano; Mergellina e BertoneTM SORTING DATE: 1731-11-14
Without dedicatee

 According to Alm, Bonlini, Groppo, and Wiel. It is attributed to Cordans in GO but not in NGDMM/2.

5! It was elsewhere given with the subtitle // vizio in maschera tra Polissena vedova e Don Chilone filosofo. The note to the reader of I fidarsi
refers to I] vizio mascherato. See also Suppl. 4a.

 Wiel (Teatri, p. 105) attributes the work to Filippo Castrio. In other Italian accounts, the text is considered to have been written in collaboration
with Antonio Mango, who wrote the dedication to the libretto used for Giacomelli's setting (Rome, 1731; Foligno, 1734). Vanstryp was active
in Rome from 1730 to c. 1750.

 Strohm (Opernarien, ii, 207) maintains that intermezzi for Tabarano and Scintilla were given with this work. Bonlini (MS, p. 222) says
that they were given only with the earlier Neapolitan production.

426 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

CO In a period of relative peace with the Romans, Hannibal went to Bithynia to enjoy the protection of
King Prusia (here called Nicomedes), but he was discovered there by a Roman legate and killed. The
account, derived from Plutarch, was mediated by Corneille's La morte d'Annibale. This first drama
of the season opened on 14 November 1731 (NV) with applause [given] as much for the composition
..as for the performers who presented the work. This is a significant comment, since most members
of the cast were then unknown. Angelo Amorevoli sang in the title role with Gaetano Valletta (Nicomede)
and Giustina Turcotti (Elisa).* The production enjoyed a good attendance through 15 December.*

A Score in B-Bc (copy in US-We); arias in US- BEm*

Listed as Bonlini 673; Groppo 677; Wiel 317; Alm 834

1731/12 = Scipione il giovane Music by Luca Antonio Predieri
[ScIPIO THE YOUNGER]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Gio. Francesco Bortolotti
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1731-11-19
w Dedicated to Richard Wynne
Oe Antiochos, the king of Syria, took Scipio Africanus, the eldest son of Publius Scipione, prisoner. Most

of the story, which involved Antiochos's infatuation with his prisoner's wife, Domizia, is invented,
though it is indebted to Piovene's Publio Cornelio Scipione (1712/2). San Giovanni's first drama
of the season opened on 19 November 1731 (NV). It was found to be pleasing enough, both for the
composition and for the famous singers, who included Antonio Bernacchi (Scipione), Faustina Bordoni
(Domizia), and Antonio Barbieri (Antioco). Of many works in which Bernacchi appeared, those of this
season seem most likely to have elicited Zanetti's caricature of the castrato's endless trail of notes.!
A Score in F-Pe; arias in I-Vqs
Listed as Bonlini 674; Groppo 678; Wiel 310; Alm 835

1731/13 La Rodelinda Music attributed to Bartolomeo Cordans
[RODELINDA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Salvi, rev. Pietro Chechia
Md Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With Dorina e Nibbio, then Tilla e Pancrazio * SORTING DATE: 1731-12-11
& Dedicated to the Ladies of Venice

%4 _applauso tanto per la composizione della musica, quanto per li recitanti che lo rappresentano (Diario ordinario, No. 2234, p.6). Comedy
productions were closed from 11 through 13 November because of a three-day exposition of relics in San Marco (Joc. cit.).

5 Turcotti was the subject of a Zanetti caricature showing her to be short and buxom. She appeared in Venice at random times between 1721
and 1743,

* Diario ordinario, No. 2245, p. 11. Turcotti was the subject of another Zanetti caricature. She had been absent from the Venetian stage since
she appeared in 1722/5.

' The arias in I-IBbor are from the setting by Giacomelli.
58 According to Bonlini (MS, p. 222), Predieri was a young student of the sciences.

 Identified in the libretto as someone who had traveled throughout Europe. He settled in Venice in 1735, frequented the circle of the English
merchant Joseph Smith, and became the father of Giustiniana Wynne, whose relationship with Andrea Memmo (the cataloguer of Smith's
collection of paintings) in the 1750s is the subject of Andrea di Robilant's A Venetian Affair (New York: Knopf, 2003). Wynne died in Venice
(in the parish of Santa Sofia) in April 1751 (GDN).

9  assai piacevole, tanto per la composizione, che per li famosi Cantanti (Diario ordinario, No. 2236, p. 9).
' See the commentaries below on Epaminonda (1731/14) and Demetrio (1732/3).

 The latter according to a manuscript annotation in Bonlini (MS, p. 223).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 427

Or  This second drama, on a text modified from that of /] Bertarido, re de' Longobardi (1727/8), opened
on 11 December 1731 (NV), when it was found to be pleasing.? Maria Laurenti Novelli sang in the
lead role with Felice Novelli (Bertarido) and Veneranda Pendesich (his sister, Edvige).*

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 675; Groppo 679; Wiel 313; Alm 836

1731/14 Epaminonda' Music by Geminiano Giacomelli
[EPAMINONDAS]
A dramma per musica Text by multiple authors
i Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1731-12-26
& Dedicated to Henry Robartes, Count of Radnor
 Epaminondas, who led the Thebans against the Spartans, was dismayed to learn that his son, Creon,

and daughter, Ismene, had fallen in love with the daughter and son of his enemy Peisander. Antonio
Barbieri sang in the title role, with Antonio Bernacchi as his son and Barbara Stabili as his daughter.
Faustina Bordoni appeared as Creon's beloved, Aristheia, and Giuseppe Appianino as Ismene's revered
Argilios.** This second drama opened on 26 December 1731 (NV).

fi Score in B-Bc
Listed as Bonlini 676; Groppo 680; Wiel 324; Alm 837

1731/15 Nino Music by Frangois Courcelle
[Ninus]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Ippolito Zanelli' by Vincenzo Cassani
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With Moschetta e Grullo; Perrica e Varrone SORTING DATE: 1731-12-27
& Dedicated to Pierre de Bordes'

OO # Ninus (Gaetano Valletta), the son of Atalos (Angelo Zanoni) and the king of the Assyrians, together
with Semiramis (Giustina Turcotti), the widow of Atalos's predecessor Memnon, killed Zoroaster, the
king of the rival Bactrians. Much of Zanelli's account was concerned with the affairs of Zomira (Anna

3 Diario ordinario, No. 2245, p. 11, wherein the work is entitled Dorelinda. It is identified as Rosalinda in I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 182, f.741v.
A license to print the libretto (for La costanza di Rodelinda, regina de' Longobardi) had been issued on the 7th.

* She was a virtuosa in the service of Prince [Michat $.W.?] Lubomirski; M. L. Novelli was in the service of the king of Poland.

5 Giacomelli (1692-1740) was newly re-assumed into service as maestro di cappella for the Duchess Dorotea of Parma. He had served the
court in the same capacity from 1719 to 1727.

 Sometimes considered to have included Domenico Lalli, but there is no firm evidence for this. Among those who credit Lalli is Stieger
(Opernlexikon, i, 394), who credits the first setting to Pietro Torri (Munich, 1727). Sartori (8960) credits the 1727 music to Torri, while noting
that Giacomelli's name is written in the only surviving libretto for that performance. Sartori also shows earlier works on the subject (Naples,
1684; Palermo, 1687) on a like-named text by Andrea Perruccio.

 The Cornish Radnor, who lived abroad from 1726 to 1741, may have been among the milordi inglesi reported on 1 December not only
to have arrived in Venice but also to be entertaining themselves splendidly with the diversions of the dramas (Diario ordinario, No. 2238,
p. 9). The [third] earl of Radnor was reported to have a very large house in Venice. He left in mid-July of the following summer, by which
time he had been abroad 4 or 5 years (GB-Lpro, SP, Ser. 99, Box 63, f. 204v, report of Neil Brown, 25 July 1732), but several family members,
anticipating his return, remained.

8 The setting is likely to have been prompted by the recent publication (1731) of the text in the collected works of Sebastiano Biancardi [=
Domenico Lalli]. It appears to have been the last text by him to be set to music.

 Confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 2252, p. 4.

 Bonlini (MS, p. 224) associated the text with works given earlier in Reggio (Sartori 16520; 1720) and Rome (Sartori 16521; 1722). Zanelli,
whom Bonlini identifies as Modenese, is credited as the author of the later libretto; the first is anonymous.

'! A French nobleman described in the libretto as a dilettante of belli arti.

428

1732/1

V1

t 2

OO x

1732/2

im

OOE

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Maria Peruzzi), the daughter of Zoroaster, and her lover Hydaspes (Filippo Finazzi), both of whom
were captives of the Assyrians. This second drama opened on 27 December 1731 (NV).' The staging
was ambitious. The work opened in a field littered with bodies but decorated for the coronation of
Semiramis. The hanging gardens of Babylon (complete with fountains) were depicted in Act Two.
No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 677; Groppo 681; Wiel 329; Alm 838

Alessandro nell' Indie Music by Giovanni Battista Pescetti'
[ALEXANDER IN INDIA]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Birina e Golpone;'TM a combattimento SORTING DATE: 1732-01-30
Without dedicatee

Metastasio's text was already well known: Vinci's setting had been given in Rome in 1730 and Handel
had set an adaptation of it (Poro, re dell Indie; HWV 28) for London.' It was assumed that the reader
of the libretto would know the work by reputation, for its argomento said only that the principal action
of the drama was shaped by Alexander's generosity towards Poros. In the actual event, the Indian queen
Cleophis/Cleofide, who loved Poros and sought an alliance between her kingdom and his, played a
pivotal role. Metastasio's text was carried forward in settings such as that of Cimarosa (Rome, 1781).
This third drama opened on 30 January 1732 (NV) with applause." The cast, which included Filippo
Finazzi (Alessandro), Gaetano Valleta (Poro), and Giustina Turcotti (C/eofide), was little known. The
temple of Bacchus was shown in the both the first and third acts.

Arias in I-Bas

Listed as Bonlini 679; Groppo 683; Wiel 328; Alm 840

Gl'evenimenti di Ruggiero" Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni
[THE ADVENTURES OF ROGER]

A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Marchi
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Serpilla e Bacocco; Dorina e Nibbio; Tilla e Pancrazio' SORTING DATE: 1732-02-06

Dedicated to Paolo Martinengo'*

In this revised version of Alcina delusa da Ruggiero (1725/7), the Norman invader Roger I defeated
the Byzantine rulers of Bari in 1071 and the Arabs of Malta in 1090. He conquered Sicily in 1091. He
also established a Norman outpost in Antioch and fought in the First Crusade. His son, Roger II, who
was named King of Sicily, captured the Amalfi coast and Naples in the 1130s.

Gl'evenimenti opened on 6 February 1732 (NV). The title-page was dated 1732; licenses to print libretti
were issued on 25 January 1732 and 30 January 1731 M.V. Felice Novelli sang in the title role, with
Maria Laurenti Novelli (A/cina) and Veneranda Pendesich (Bradamante). On 11 February a representative
of the Council of Ten delivered an order requiring that the singers perform every night without fail

' Confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 2252, p. 6.

' This was Pescetti's last season of activity in Venice for a number of years. In 1736 he went to London as a harpsichordist and the following
year became the director of the Opera of the Nobility. He returned to Venice in 1745.

' Or Li birbi (Bonlini MS, p. 224; Groppo MS, p. 230).
'5 It had its premiere three days after Pescetti's setting, on 2 February 1731.
'6 Diario ordinario, No. 2266, p. 11.

'7 Or Il vecchio capriccioso in amore. Groppo (MS, p. 230) lists all three; Wiel (Teatri, p. 111) lists I! vecchio capriccioso and Serpilla e

Bacocco.

8 A Venetian nobleman said, in Marchi's dedication, to be a great patron of the arts and a sponsor well connected with the Vatican.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 429

and that the management pay their wages and daily expenses promptly. Matteo Bevilacqua, who was
making his debut in the intermezzi of this production, was particularly singled out.'

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 678; Groppo 682; Wiel 334; Alm 839

1732/3 Il Demetrio Music by Johann Adolf Hasse
[DEMETRIOS]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Giovanni Boldini
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1732-02-10
is) Dedicated to Charles Sackville, Count of Middlesex'!

One of Metastasio's most popular libretti, Demetrio was based on the life of the Syrian ruler of the
second century BC after the usurpation of his empire by Alexander Balas. Before fleeing, Demetrios
consigned his infant son (also named Demetrios) to his faithful vassal, Phoeniceus/Fonicio, and the
child was raised with the name Alcestes. Alcestes ascended through the ranks of Alexander's army.
He fell in love with Alexander's daughter, Cleonike, before his true identity was discovered.

oo This third drama opened, in the midst of a period of frigid weather, on 10 February 1732 (NV). A
license to print the libretto had been issued on 1 February 1732. The production was praised as a marvel,
as much for the music as for the magnificent scenes and singers.""! The cast included Antonio Bernacchi
(Alceste), Faustina Bordoni Hasse (Cleonice), and Antonio Barbieri (Fenicio).

oO The text for Demetrio had first been set by Caldara for the imperial court in November 1731.'!? Hasse's
setting had been given there in February 1732.!? Hasse's work was to be performed at San Cassiano
(1737/2); under the title Cleonice, for Friedrich Christian, the Electoral Prince of Saxony, at Sant' Angelo
(1740/1); and under the original title at San Giovanni Grisostomo (1746/14). Vivaldi adapted it for
performance in Ferrara for Carnival 1737. He was instructed to shorten the recitatives because operas
that last for four hours are unacceptable in Ferrara.''4 Metastasio's text was to be set by roughly 50
other composers over the next century.

fi Scores (Venice, 1732): I-Vnm; (Dresden, 1740): B-Be; D-Dlb, Hs (Act 2 only), LEmi; arias, fragments,

and pastiches in A-Wn; D-Bsb, Dlb; F-Pc; US- BEm, CAi, Cn; I-Vc, Vnm
Listed as Bonlini 680; Groppo 684; Wiel 325; Alm 841

' The list of performers given in I-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Busta 45, entry of 11 Febraro 1731 [M.V.] appears to be a composite one for San
Moise over the whole of the 1731-32 contractual year. Itnames Laura Bambini (who appeared in Rodelinda and Ruggiero); her husband Verachio
(no other known roles); Domenico Battaglini (Rodelinda; Ruggiero), Veneranda Dannese (La Lucchina; Rodelinda only), Veneranda Pendesich
(Rodelinda; Ruggiero), Maria Penna (intermezzi for Ruggiero), and Matteo Bevilacqua (intermezzi for Ruggiero). Neither this list nor the
further item of 22 Febraro 1731 [M.V.] entirely matches the names given in the libretto. In place of the specified Felice and Maria Laurenti
Novelli (listed as Ruggiero and Alcina respectively) we find I. Ustachio [ = Verachio] as Alindo and Veneranda Dannese. Maria Denzio
(libretto; unlisted for other seasons), who is otherwise unknown, may have been the same person as Maria Penna.

"Late in the 1730s Lord Middlesex involved himself in opera sponsorship in London. In 1741 he was co-manager, with the earl of Holderness
[Richard d'Arcy], of the London production of Handel's final opera, Deidamia (HWV 42; see Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 32). He had arrived
in Venice with several other British nobles (Robert Montague, Mr. Shirley, et al.) by 7 December 1731 (GB-Lpro, SPV, Series 99, Box 63,
f. 187v, letter of Col. Burges). The duke of Kingston (Evelyn Pierrepont) arrived only on 23rd February (see Burges's letter of 29 February
1732 N.S.).

"i  una meraviglia, tanto per la musica, quanto per le magnifiche scene, e cantanti (Diario ordinario, No. 2272, p. 10).

2

Like many of Caldara's uses of Metastasio's texts, this first setting seems to have been intended as a commemorative name-day work for
the Emperor Charles VI, since its premiere was on 4 November 1731, the feast of San Carlo Borromeo.

"3 The Viennese production clearly preceded the Venetian one by enough time for the Venetian dedication to Sackville to begin, This opera,
which has brought to its illustrious author the applause of the sovereign court of the empire... (Quest' opera che ha meritati al suo illustre
autore gli applausi della Corte Sovrana dell'Imperio....). Hasse was identified in the libretto as maestro sopranumerario of the Chapel Royal
at Naples. Caldara's setting (Sartori 4377) had been given in Vienna for the previous name-day of the emperor (4 November 1731).

"4 Vivaldi to Bentivoglio (2 Gennario 1737): Egli ha sentito dire che il Demetrio sarebbe troppo lungo; egli stesso si e reso conto che un' opera
della durata di 4 ore non risulti adatta per Ferrara, ma afferma che Lanzetti...gli avrebbe impedito di ridurre i recitativi (Heller, Cronologia,

p. 61).

430 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1732/4 Le metamorfosi odiamorosi in Birba trionfale
nelle gare delle terre amanti Music by Salvatore Apolloni'
[THE LOVE-HATE METAMORPHOSIS OF THE TRIUMPHANT UPSTART
IN THE COMPETITION BETWEEN THE LANDS OF LOVERS]

A [satirical] dramma per musica Text by Antonio Gori''
M1 Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Winter (Giovedi Grasso)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1732-02-21~

Dedicated to Madama la Moda"

This text was pivotal both in marking the debut of the Gori troupe at San Samuele and in cleverly quoting
from recent operas, forming a pastiche of parodies. On the surface it concerns the affairs of the reigning
queen Mestre (a widow) and her daughter Malghera.'"* Falling in love with Prince Carpeneo [Gaetano
Casali] of Chiassi, the queen [Agnese Amurat] abandons her maternal duties and thus precipitates serious
conflict with her daughter [Zanetta Farussi Casanova]. After the Oracle of Delphi enters the drama,
the Lilliputian prince Striccheroch [Pietro Gandini],'? who is vice-regent of a foreign government,
falls in love first with Malghera and then with her mother. Bottenigo [Giuseppe Imer], the prince of
Bagoli, who loves Malghera, threatens to wed Mestre for spite, but ends up with Malghera.' The
particulars of the story were said to have been much disputed among previous authors.'?!

Some satirical elements of the work concentrated on manners and customs including speech (discourse
between foreigners and natives in general'), dress (Act Three opens in the noted tailor's gallery),
and scenery (Act One opens in the stereotyped woods with a view of the sea). There were snippets
from classical plots featuring Dido (1724/12), Cato (1728/9), Semiramis (1729/4), and Elagabalus.'
Even musical instruments were grist for this satirical mill.'* Several arias in Leo's Catone in Utica
(1728/9) were paraphrased. Bottenigo's final toast offered the dictum, Let's do what the women in
comedies do: Let each woman rule for one day in turn.

LORS Le metamorfosi seems to have run at the end of Carnival 1732.' The troupe members are identified
in the libretto only by satirical names. Zanetta Casanova, who left the troupe in 1735, took the score
for Le metamorfosi with her. It was produced in Warsaw, with her participation, in 1748 as Le conteste

@p

"'S Sartori (15583, 15884), apparently following Mamczarz, attributes the music to Maccari, but Apolloni [Appolonil is cited as the composer
in the libretto. Unpublished research by Gastone Vio established on the basis of diverse archival citations that Apolloni (c. 1697-after 1759)
was active as an instrumentalist by 1716, was engaged at a violinist at San Marco and at San Samuele from 1727 (I-Vas, PS, Busta 153, f.
93v), was an examiner of candidates to enter the instrumentalists' guild in the 1740s, and remained active through the 1750s.

"6 In a note to the reader, Gori cited the first fruit...of my weak genius sung in this same theater (II primo parto bamboleggiante in fasce
del mio debolissimo ingegno cantato in questo stesso teatro divenne presto gigante, perche lo compatisti; eccoti il secondo....). Gori's name
was anagrammed as Goanto Rinio. Gori had enrolled as a law student at the University of Padua in 1717 but did not complete his degree
(Miggiani,   Za canta, p. 25).

" Described as the governess of Castel Bizzarro.

"8 Mestre and Marghera [ = Malghera in Ven. dialect], both now thriving commercial and industrial cities, were then small towns. Both are
on the mainland immediately west of Venice.

"'? Gori was clearly acquainted with Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels (London, 1726).
 Cast identifications by Maria Giovanna Miggiani. Weiss gives similar assignments.

"2! In the lengthy satirical dedication, the never sufficiently praised and venerated author of the book entitled // teatro alla moda [=Benedetto
Marcello] was cited for his wise precepts of plausible poetics.

'2 Ballotta (Rodrico Lombardi), a local advisor to Striccheroch, sings in dialect. Striccheroch lapses into German phrases in his asides.
"3 Vescovo, Mestre, pp. 18f.
'4 An added aria for Balotta in Act Three reads, Su via donca soneme el fagotto/Za canta el Quajotto./Mermeo, squaquara.

"5 Groppo (MS, p. 231) says that the work was given in tempo della comedia, which usually means autumn (i.e., late in 1732), but the printed
libretto indicates that the work was for Carnovale 1732. Bonlini's MS suggests that the work opened shortly after Demetrio (1732/3).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 431

delle regine Mestre e Malghera per il trono.'* Le metamorfosi was also given in Padua in 1732,'' in
Venice or Padua in 1734, and apparently again in Venice in 1744 (see Suppl. 1).

A Score (Warsaw, 1748) in D-Dsa!*
Listed as Bonlini 681; Groppo 685; Wiel 332; Alm 842

1732/5 Euristeo Music by Johann Adolf Hasse
[EURYSTHEOS]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Domenico Lalli
im Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1732-05-21
& Dedicated to the Most Noble English Nation'?

Eurystheos, the infant prince of Argos, was found in the woods near the temple of Jupiter. He was raised,
under the name Ormontes, by Tersander, the custodian of the temple, together with Tersander's daughter
Erginda. The grown Ormontes (Gaetano Majorana) commanded the armies of Cisseos (Gregorio Babbi),
the king of Macedonia, and slew his enemy Epigenes. Until his identity was revealed, he sought the
hand of princess Aglatida (Francesca Cuzzoni Sandoni).

Oo Euristeo opened on 21 May 1732 (A).'* The date coincided with the death of the doge Alvise III
Mocenigo, for which reason the Ascension fair itself was not permitted to open (cf. 1732/6).'*!
Nonetheless, Euristeo was still receiving applause on 7 June and had its last performance on the 9th.'
Zeno's text had first been set by Caldara for performance at the imperial court in Vienna in 1724.'3

A Scores in B-Be (lacks sinfonia); D-Dlb; F-Pc (Warsaw, 1733)

Listed as Bonlini 682; Groppo 686; Wiel 333; Alm 843

1732/6 Chi non fa non falla Music attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
[HE WHO DOES NOTHING CANNOT ERR]
A divertimento comico Text attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
rd Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1732-05-21
& Without dedicatee

'6 Mestre was to be played by La Signora Bellivoltica Altipifaria and Malghera by La Signora Scarminicola Bassigiuvena. Both descriptions
may have satirized singing habits (high piffari and premature basses). According to Goldoni, Casanova's stage appeal derived from her
appearance and acting skills. She sang out of tune and out of time, according to the poet. Casanova was the widowed mother of the adventurer
Giacomo Casanova and three other young children. Her immediate destination was St. Petersburg, but she eventually ended up in the service
of Friedrich August, king of Saxony and Poland. Casanova's life is treated in Julian LewAnski, Buranella e l'opera Le contese di Mestre e
di Malghera per il trono (1748) in Vita teatrale in Italia e Polonia fra Seicento e Settecento, ed. Michat Bristiger, Jerzy Kowalczyk, and
Jacek Lipifski (Warsaw, 1984), 209-17. Sartori 15587 corresponds to the Warsaw performance. There is little textual variation, and apparently
little musical difference, between the 1732 and 1748 versions. In the Warsaw production, Casanova retained the role of Malghera, with Rosa
Grassi as Mestre (Miggiani,  Za canta, p. 23.

"7 Alm 866; Sartori 15583 (as opposed to 15584 for Venice).

"8 Maria Giovanna Miggiani's transcription of the score, and commentary by both are newly available in Problemi di critica goldoniana,
x/xi (ed. Manlio Pastore Stocchi and Gilberto Pizzamiglio), Ravenna: Longo Editore, 2005.

" Its virtues as enumerated here consisted of its being respected for its dominion, distinguished for its power, and illustrious for its nobility.
A report from the new British consul Neil Brown, written on 30 May 1732, noted that The Fair and other Diversions of Ascension have drawn
hither a great many Strangers; the chief of which are the Prince and Princess of Modena incognito, and Cardinal Polignac; and about twenty
of His Majesty's subjects (GB-Lpro, SP, Ser. 99, Box 63, f. 195v). Reports from July (ff. 202, 204v) indicate that the British contingent at
Ascension included the Earl of Radnor and members of his family as well as Charles Stanhope, a younger brother of the Earl of Chesterfield.
 According to the Diario ordinario (No. 2315, p. 8), the prince and princess of Modena were in attendance with the Cardinal di Polignac.

5! Carlo Ruzzini was elected his successor on 2 June and made his public entry on the 6th.

'2 A petition was made to provide a longer production, for on 5 Febraro 1731 M.V. the Council of Ten reaffirmed the mandate that only seventeen
performances of the opera were to be given during the Ascension season. See I-Vas, CX, Filza 964, entry of 9 giugno 1732.

'3 Sartori 9417.

432

1732/7

fi

 1732a
1732/8

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

In this satire on the financial dilemmas of theaters, the poor musician Alipio loved the Bolognese singer
Lispina, who was pursued by the rich Baron Seccagine. In an echo of Marcello's J/ teatro alla moda,
Lispina was accompanied by her meddlesome mother (Sempiterna) and her servant (Mamolo), while
her performances were managed by the impecunious impresario Saltobello and his assistant Volpino.
To obviate damaging testimony, Saltobello recommended that they form a new company in a faraway
land where they would be respected and well compensated. After the baron learned to sing and Volpino
to play the archlute, the baron agreed to fund the troupe. The three Bolognese roles were sung in
Bolognese dialect, but the casting for them is unknown. Groppo labeled the work ridiculous.'TM
Chi non fa was first performed in Venice on 21 May 1732 (A). Like Euristeo, it ran despite the death
of the doge on the eve of Ascension. The original production had been given in Bologna in 1729. Chi
non fa was revived under the title // protettore alla moda (1747/9).

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 683; Groppo 687; Wiel 330; Alm 844

L'ortolana contessa Music attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini and others
[THE GARDENER WHO WAS A COUNTESS]

A divertimento comico Text attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1732-06-02
Without dedicatee

The subject of the shepherdess-turned-countess was essentially one which could have originated in
an intermezzo but is here elaborated for a cast of eight. Celindo, the unmarried son of the wealthy
Monsieur Panicone, is unable to respond to the love of the countess Ardelinda. He has fallen in love
instead with the peasant Lauretta. The cast members are not named. L'ortolana contessa was first
performed on 2 June 1732 (A), the date of election of the new doge, Carlo Ruzzini. Although Groppo
characterized the work as ridiculous,'*> it was said to have been received with high praise.'* Its final
performance was on the 9th, when both the theatrical season and the festivities in celebration of the
new doge ended.'3

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 684; Groppo 688; Wiel 331; Alm 845

Le nozze di Psiche e Cupido. Cf. Suppl. 6.

L'Ardelinda Music by Tomaso Albinoni
[ARDELINDA]

A dramma per musica Text by Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Dorilla e Balanzone'* SORTING DATE: 1732-11-06
Without dedicatee

Ardelinda, the princess of Crete, found herself pregnant after a clandestine affair with the Albanian
prince Athestes, who was engaged to Aspasia, the princess of Cyprus. En route to marry Aspasia, Athestes
encountered Ardelinda. Recognizing her despite her disguise as Ismene, he married her. Ardelinda opened

'54 Groppo MS, p. 232.

'35 Groppo MS, p. 232.

'86 Literally somma gradimento in (A).
'57 Diario ordinario, No. 2323, p.10.

8 Or La serva scaltra.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 433

on 6 November 1732 (DO), when it pleased many.'*? Antonia Cermenati (La Napolitanina) sang
in the title role, with Pietro Maurigi (Afeste) and Giovanna Guaetta (Aspasia). Albinoni was identified
in the libretto as a celebrated maestro.

A Arias in I-Bas
Listed as Bonlini 685; Groppo 689; Wiel 327; Alm 846

1732/9 L' Issipile Music by Giovanni Porta
[HyYPSIPYLE]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio'*!
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1732-11-22
a Dedicated to Karl-Albrecht, Elector of Bavaria

In this story taken from Greek mythology, Thoas, the king of the Aegean island of Lemnos, had arranged
for the marriage of his daughter Hypsipyle to Jason, the prince of Thessaly. Their enemies, the Thracians,
led by Hypsipyle's spurned suitor, Learchos, conspired to sabotage the pair.

OOo The production of this first opera, which was in rehearsal by 15 November, opened on 22 November
1732 (A) to universal applause. The theater was newly refurbished to improve both its appearance
and its acoustics. '*? Nonetheless, the well-worn temple of Bacchus was employed in Act One. Antonia
Merighi sang in the title role, with Filippo Giorgi (Toante), Venturin Rocchetti (Giasone), Giuseppa
Pircher (Learco), and the Bavarian Anna Rosa (Rodope). Metastasio's text had been set earlier in 1732
by Porpora (Teatro delle Dame, Rome), Hasse (San Bartolomeo, Naples), and Francesco Conti (Imperial
court, Vienna). While it enjoyed extensive success elsewhere, it was set only two further times for Venice
 once by Gassmann (San Moise, 1758) and once by Marinelli (La Fenice, 1796).

A Scores in A-Wgm; I-MC, Tn (inc.); arias in I-Ne
Listed as Bonlini 686; Groppo 690; Wiel 323; Alm 847

1732/10 La caduta di Leone, Music by Giuseppe Antonio Paganelli'

imperatore d'Oriente
[THE FALL OF LEO, EMPEROR OF THE EAST]

A dramma per musica Text by Carlo Pagani-Cesa'*
11 Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With Tilla e Pancrazio SORTING DATE: 1732-12-05

& Dedicated to Philip, Prince of Hesse-Darmstadt

 After Leo, an unpopular Eastern Emperor [457-474 AD], condemned the popular Michael Balbus to
death, conspirators freed him from prison on the eve of his execution. Together they toppled the
government. La caduta di Leone appears to have opened on 5 December 1732.'** The libretto was

" Diario ordinario, No. 2386, p. 10.

 Bonlini (MS, p. 225) claimed a production in Treviso the same autumn and said that the libretti were the same except for their frontispieces,
but no libretto for the Treviso production appears to survive. However, there was a revival in Florence the following autumn.

| Either by Domenico Lalli (most bibliographers) or by Giovanni Boldini (Bonlini, MS, p. 226), the current manager of San Giovanni Grisostomo.
' Diario ordinario Nos. 2353 (...per renderlo nobilmente abbellito di dorature, & altri ornamenti), p. 8, and 2389, p. 10.

8 Paganelli (c. 1710 - c. 1763), who was from Padua, worked at Sant' Angelo for this season only. Thereafter he traveled in Germany as a
harpsichordist with an opera troupe based in Augsburg and later worked at the Spanish court.

' Bonlini (MS, p. 225) claimed that the text had been used in a Vienna production ten years earlier, but no confirmation exists.

4 A report in the Diario ordinario (No. 2398, p. 12, claiming to quote a dispatch dated 15 Novembre [1732]) speaks of its having opened
Jast night, but there are several indications that the date could have been misquoted. The actual date of the underlying avviso seems, on the
basis of other content, to have been that of 6 Decembre [1732], of which there is otherwise no trace; No. 2398 itself was dated 13 Decembre.
Previous issues had carried reports from Venice for 15 November (with different content, No. 2389), 22 November (No. 2393), and 29 November
(No. 2396). A different report for 6 December was also carried in No. 2399, p. 2. This could suggest the arrival of separate dispatches from

434 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

dedicated by the impresario, Giovanni Orsato, on the preceding day. The Marquis de los Balbases, who

was visiting from Milan, attended performances of both this and the preceding work during the week

following 6 December. Gregorio Babbi sang in the lead role in a cast consisting of only four singers.
A No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 687; Groppo 691; Wiel 326; Alm 848

1732/11 Nitocri Music by Giuseppe Sellitti'*
[NiTROCRIS]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Domenico Lalli
i Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1732-12-26~
a Dedicated to Count Carlo Prata

The ancient Egyptian queen Nitocris (Antonia Merighi) was celebrated for her beauty and her virtue.
One of the famous pyramids outside Memphis, then the capital of Egypt, was, according to legend,
built in her honor. The murder of her brother led to her ascension to the throne of Armenia, but she
remained unmarried, a subject probed here. Of the two Egyptian generals who were in love with her
sister, Emirena, it was Mirteos (Carlo Broschi) who prevailed on the stage. Meanwhile, the royal prince
Ratese (Filippo Giorgi) hoped for the hand of the queen.'*

< #  Asthe second opera, it is probable that Nitocri opened on or about 26 December 1732, although no
notice of it has come to light. It is remotely possible that it opened closer to the start of Carnival (11
January 1733). Zeno's text had previously been set by Caldara (Vienna, 1722). The stage props included
Egyptian obelisks. Contrasts of bright light and darkness were used to heighten the visual drama. The
scenery designer was Girolamo Mingozzi Colonna, identified in the libretto as a member of the Capitoline
Academy (Rome).

A Scores in D-B, Dlb; arias in US- BEm (opera 2.a)
Listed as Bonlini 688; Groppo 692; Wiel 339; Alm 850

1733/1 Argenide Music by Baldassare Galuppi
[ARGENIDE]
A dramma per musica Text by Girolamo or Alvise Giusti!
rd Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Ginestra e Lichetto; balli SORTING DATE: 1733-01-15
cs Dedicated to Francesco Antonio Rizzi and Federico Fabio'
 Argenide recounts the shipwreck of Idomeneos, the king of Crete, who vowed to kill the first person

who arrived on his beach if the god Neptune would spare his life. When this proved to be his own son,
the marriage of Princess Argenide, which (hypothetically) occurred just before the curtain was raised,
was disrupted. The story was embroidered with frivolous subplots. Argenide opened on 15 January
1733.'% It was still running on 7 February (A). Teresa Peruzzi sang as Argenide, with Gregorio Babbi
as Idomeneos.

different rapportisti, but there is no proof of this.

6 The Neapolitan Sellitti (1700-77) was chiefly active in Naples and Rome.

Nitocris (a name shared by a Babylonian queen), according to Herodotus, avenged her brother's murder by building an underground reception
room, inviting the suspects to dine there, and then allowing the Nile to flood the premises. This legendary event does not seem to have been
re-enacted in the dramma per musica. Nitocris, who ruled at the end of the sixth dynasty (to 2195 BC) was arguably the earliest female ruler
in recorded history. Like the roles of many servants, nymphs, and shepherds, those of Mirteo and Ratese have no historical foundation.

8 Groppo and others favor Alvise, while Wiel assumes the author to have been Girolamo (who wrote the libretto for the intermezzi).
 Members of the new nobility.

'S 4 palace feast occurred on January 14 in honor of Pietro Orseolo, who had been canonized the preceding May and whose relics had recently
been retrieved from France.

 ws

1733/2

i

&
On

1733/3

rT

rs)
Qe

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 435

A second work, it received high praise in one account, as much for the composition of the music
as for the expert actors. In a paraphrase the work became a marvel, as much for the composition as
for the musicians, sets, and dances.'*' Typically for Sant' Angelo, the sets featured a view of the sea
(Act One), scenes from the royal palace (Act Two), and a prison (Act Three).

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 689; Groppo 693; Wiel 337; Alm 851

Adriano in Siria Music by Geminiano Giacomelli
[HADRIAN IN SYRIA]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Pollastrella e Parpagnacco;'* balli SORTING DATE: 1733-01-30

Dedicated to Sicinio Pepoli'

The emperor Hadrian [117-138 AD] (Antonio Barbieri), in conquering the Parthians, had taken their
princess Emirena (Anna Rosa Bavarese) as his captive. He soon fell in love with her. Already engaged
to Sabina (Antonia Merighi), he was torn between love and duty. A fter marriage, his infidelities continued
and his hostility towards Emirena's lover, Pharnaspes (Carlo Broschi), was marked. Adriano opened
on 30 January 1733'* with universal applause (A). Metastasio's text had first been set by Caldara
for performance in Vienna on 9 November 1732. It remained in use through the rest of the century.
With revisions, it was the basis for Pergolesi's work of the same name (Naples, 1734).

Score in D-B; arias in A-Wn; F-Pc; US- BEm (opera terza)

Listed as Bonlini 690; Groppo 694; Wiel 340; Alm 852

Tigrane Music by Giuseppe Antonio Paganelli'*
[TIGRANES]

A dramma per musica Text by Bartolomeo Vitturi'*
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1733-02-10

Dedicated to Count Federico Rossi'*

The widowed Armenian queen Berenice, who was universally disliked for her ferocious spirit,
renounced the throne in favor of her young son, Tigranes. Tigranes promptly married Hydrene/Idrena,
of whom Berenice became exceedingly jealous. This third drama opened on 10 February 1733 with
full applause.'** Angelo Maria Monticelli sang in the title role, with Teresa Peruzzi (Berenice) and
Giovanna Guaetta (Idrena).

'S! Diari ordinari, No. 2415, p. 12 (as Argenida in Creta), and No. 2418, p. 9.

'S2 Not cited elsewhere, but this can be deduced from the libretto.

'33 Sicinio (given as Cecinio in the libretto) Ignazio Pepoli, a Bolognese count, was one of Farinelli's chief patrons. Much involved in opera
affairs in several locales, he attempted in 1725 to play off the future services of Francesca Cuzzoni between Vienna and London (see Gibson,
Royal Academy, p. 329). In the autumn of 1734 Pepoli was involved in negotiations with Vivaldi for the services of the singer Pietro Morighi
in Verona, where Vivaldi served briefly as impresario.

ST iterally la sera di Venerdi della passata [settimana]. The account of 7 February is by Donado, from whom there is no report for the preceding

week.

'S5 Paganelli is identified as a virtuoso dilettante from Padua. A setting of the same text by Giacomelli was given in Piacenza in April 1733.

'S6 Vitturi (whom Wiel, Teatri, p. 112, misnamed Girolamo) noted in the libretto that he had recently written another drama (Candalide?),
which he would hold until the following year. Cf. 1734/1.

'57 A Spanish grandee.
'88 Diario ordinario, No. 2428, p. 2.

436 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 691; Groppo 695; Wiel 336; Alm 853

1733/4 L'ambizione depressa Music by Baldassare Galuppi
[AMBITION THWARTED]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giuseppe Papis'
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1733-05-13
& Dedicated to Henry Bouverie, Count of Radnor'
 In this quasi-pastoral plot, Berenice (Elisabetta Moro), the princess of Argos, believed herself to be

more beautiful than Juno. Her father offered her hand as a reward to whomever could cure her of her
narcissistic obsession, which was unacceptable to the local culture. The Mycenaean prince Hydaspes
(Francesco Grisi) disguised himself as a shepherd to pursue this goal. Hydaspes in turn was pursued
by the princess Emirena (Maria Camati), who was dressed as a huntress. L ambizione depressa was
first performed on 13 May 1733 (A). It closed on the 31st.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 693; Groppo 697; Wiel 338; Alm 855

1733/5 Ginevra Music by Giuseppe Sellitti'
[GINEVRA]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Salvi, rev. Giovanni Boldini
ry Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1733-05-13
& Dedicated to the Prince of Ardore'
CO Following Ariosto (here termed the Tuscan Homer), the tale of the Scottish princess Guinevere/Ginevra

(Antonia Negri), which had been set by Pollarolo under the title Ariodante (1716/8), is related with
particular emphasis on the pursuit of the duke Polynexos (Antonio Baldi), despite the official interest
of the foreign prince Ariodante (Felice Salimbeni). Ginevra was first performed on 13 May 1733, when
the drama was found to be plausible.' The production closed on the 31st (A). A work of the same
title, set by Antonio Galeazzi, was given in Jesi in the same year by a cast which included Giuseppa
Pircher (Ginevra) and Elisabetta Moro (Polinesso).' Vivaldi's setting (RV 716) opened in Florence
on 17 January 1736.' Among many later settings of the work was that of Bertoni (San Samuele, 1753).

89 And to Giuseppe Grandini (after Papis's Amor generoso) by Allacci and Sartori. Papis's text was set by Alessandro Scarlatti (Naples, 1714).
The dedication was signed by Grandini, the apparent impresario.

6 Fighteenth-century members of the house of Radnor, the occupants of Longford Castle (Salisbury), descended from a union of the Pleydell
and Bouverie families. The second earl, Jacob (1694-1761), a Jacobite, was a collector of old-master paintings. Other members of this prolific
family were engaged in trade with the East, particularly India. Horace Walpole claimed that Sir Jacob bought his baronetcy from the duchess
of Kendall (who was the sister of Johann Mattheus von Schulenburg and the mistress of George I) for 12,000 in 1714.

8! 4 Neapolitan maestro di cappella. Neapolitan taste influenced the choice of cast, which included the castrato Felice Salimbene (d. 1751),
a pupil of Maestro Porpora. Salimbene became a great favorite in Berlin.
g

' Giacomo Francesco Milano, the marquis of San Giorgio, whose merits are praised in the dedication. He was married in 1725 to Enrica
Caracciolo, daughter of the prince of Santo Buono (Griffin, Gazzetta, Doc. 537). His patronage of music is discussed in Giacomo Francesco
Milano e il ruolo dell'aristocrazia nel patroncinio delle attivita musicali nel secolo XVIII, ed. G. Pitarresi (Reggio Calabria: Laruffa, 2001).

8 Diario ordinario, No. 2467, p. 3; also (A). San Samuele again seems to have petitioned the Council of Ten to permit a longer production
at Ascension [see I-Vas, CX, Filza 968, entry of 23 Genaro 1732].

4 Recently reported by Gatti, Spettacoli, p. 32.

5 The text used in Florence was revised by Damiano Marchi (Tuscans take great pride in their poetry, observed Luca Casimiro degli Albizzi).
In July 1735 Vivaldi proposed to change the work to Merope on the grounds that Zeno's heroine better suited Anna Gird's abilities than Salvi's.
Albizzi rejected the proposal and, after seeing a draft of the work in August, he urged Vivaldi to put more time into it, since the last work
[of Carnival] is the best remembered (Holmes, Opera Observed, p. 41). Vivaldi countered that the Florentine company was not very good,

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 437

fi No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 692; Groppo 696; Wiel 341; Alm 854

1733/6 Montezuma Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[MONTEZUMA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Girolamo or Alvise Giusti!
im Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With Drusilla e Poliperconte;'* SORTING DATE: 1733-11-14
Mergellina e don Narciso; and balli
& Without dedicatee

Montezuma, the leader of the Aztecs, was conquered by the Spanish explorer Cortez in 1519. This plot
deals with the final days of Aztec rule. The historical background of the story, a distinct departure for
the Venetian stage, was to be more popular in the nineteenth century than in the eighteenth.' The account
itself was little different from countless tales spun from European antiquity. Montezuma's daughter
Teutila fell in love with Ramirez, the brother of his Spanish conqueror. A fter various adventures involving
disguises, oracles, and threatened human sacrifices, Teutila and Ramirez succeeded to the throne jointly.

 & Vivaldi's firstnew work for the Venetian stage in five years opened as the opera prima at Sant' Angelo
on 14 November 1733 (A). Found to be agreeable, it was noted especially for its very beautiful
dances,' which were by Giovanni Gallo. Massimiliano Miller sang in the lead role, with Anna Gird
as his wife (Mitrena), Giuseppa Pircher (Teutile), and Francesco Bilanzoni (Fernando Cortes). Among
the progeny of the text was a setting by Pasquale Anfossi (Reggio, 1776). Spontini's Fernand Cortez
(Paris, 1809) was based on a different source. The opening scene was situated in the lagoon of
Mexico,'' which divided the imperial palace from the Spanish quarter. An Aztec sacrificial ceremony
was depicted in the next but last scene of Act Three. Antonio Mauro was the set designer.

A Lost score (inc.) previously held in UA-Kan now restored to D-Bsa'
Listed as Bonlini 694; Groppo 698; Wiel 335; Alm 856; RV 723

after which A lbizzi offered to rescind his contract. Vivaldi did not back down, but in subsequent correspondence Albizzi also tried to dissuade
him from emending Marchi's revisions and from introducing old arias. .. which can harm the reputation ofa composer. Vivaldi was unheeding
and his version of the work opened in Florence on 17 January 1736. After its production, Albizzi, seemingly relaxed, offered Vivaldi the score
and a package of costumes (un involto di roba da vestire) to enjoy in my memory (oc. cit.).

66 Motezuma in the libretto, apparently from a failure to observe an abbreviation sign [Motezuma] in the manuscript, although in older sources
the name could also be rendered as Moctezuma.

87 Wiel attributes the work to Girolamo, Groppo to Alvise.

"8 Drusilla vedova veneziana chiesta in moglie da Poliperconte musico oltremarino was published under the title /ntermezzi Drusilla vedova
veneziana (Sartori 13426). Mergellina e don Narciso was also known as II turco deluso.

' The subject of world exploration was hardly foreign to the Venetian consciousness, however. John Cabot, a contemporary of Cortez, was
of Venetian birth. The learned Franciscan monk Vincenzo Coronelli (1650-1718), celebrated for his maps, was extremely interested in the
geography of the New World.

'" Diario ordinario, No. 2547, p. 9.
'" The lagoon which once surrounded Mexico City was gradually filled in by the city's growth.

'? The unpublished edition by Stephen Voss, who identified the work in 2002 from a microfilm of the unattributed score then in Kiev, has

been the basis for several recent performances. Montezuma has also been edited and recorded by Alan Curtis.

438

1733/7

i

A we

OOo

1734/1



A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Berenice Music by Francesco Araya'?
[BERENICE]

A dramma per musica Text derived from Antonio Salvi!
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1733-12-26

Dedicated to the Marchioness Vidona'

After Cleopatra Berenice succeeded to the Egyptian throne [first century BC], according to this account,
the Romans feared that through marriage she would align Egypt with Pontos, then ruled by Mithridates.
Alexander, the son of Ptolemy Alexander, was dispatched from Rome, where he had been educated,
to crush this possibility by seeking her hand in marriage. The work was situated in Alexandria, and
the scenes of Act Three featured a picture gallery and a mausoleum of the ancient Egyptian kings.
Berenice opened on 26 December 1733 (NV)! and was still running on c. 11 January 1734 (A). The
Neapolitan castrato Gaetano Majorana sang as Alexander,' with Lucia Facchinelli as Berenice and
Carlo Broschi as Demetrios. Araya's setting had been given in Florence in 1730; the text itself had
first been set by Perti (Pratolino, 1709). The best known setting was to be that of Handel (Berenice,
Queen of Egypt; HWV 38), which was produced at Covent Garden (May 1737). Salvi's account offers
an interesting contrast with that of Pasqualigo, set by Orlandini as 1725/1.

Arias in B-Bc

Listed as Bonlini 695; Groppo 699; Wiel 347; Alm 857

Candalide Music by Tomaso Albinoni!
[CANDALIDE]

A dramma per musica Text by Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With Drusilla e Poliperconte; balli (cori) SORTING DATE: 1734-01-05
Without dedicatee

The Egyptian king Zanthyppos/Santippo (Angela Zannucchi) had fallen in love with the dowry of
the Persian princess Candalide (Rosa Cirili). While her travel to his homeland was still in progress,
Emirena, the daughter of one of his generals, came to his notice. She was engaged to Gusman (Francesco
Bilanzoni), another general, who returned victorious from battle only to discover that Emirena had been
disloyal. Candalide departed as the wedding of Zanthyppos and Emirena (Marta Arigoni) was about
to begin.' The action takes place in Memphis [the predecessor of Cairo].

Candalide was first performed, as the second opera, on 5 January 1734 (A, NV)' with universal
enjoyment (A). Albinoni seems to have been recalled from retirement to fill in for the absent Vivaldi,
who was staging revivals of two of his works (Zamerlano and Adelaide) at the new theater of the

"3 Araya (1709-70), though Neapolitan by birth, was said to be maestro to the ruler of the Russian provinces. His tenure at the court of St.
Petersburg officially began in 1735.

4 With revisions attributed to Domenico Lalli and Antonio Gori (Bonlini MS, p. 227).

"5 Identity undetermined. The name Vidona comes from the Piedmont.

"6 Also reported in the Diario ordinario, No. 2566, p. 7.

'7 Zanetti's caricature of Majorana could have been based on this or several other productions. The comment says only that he was singing
in San Giovanni Grisostomo. The drawing shows the singer indifferently carrying his portative organ away after he had finished his aria.

"8 According to the libretto, this was the 80th work which Albinoni had set to music.

" Anna Gird and Pietro Morighi were involved in Vivaldi's productions in Verona and were therefore unavailable.

8 Also reported in the Diario ordinario, No. 2568, p. 10.

1734/2

mM

[)
02O@

1734/3

'8! See Heller (Cronologia, p. 55). II Tamerlano (RV 703) wasa pastiche which included airs by Hasse and Giacomelli. The libretto for L Adelaide
(RV 695) was dedicated by Vivaldi to Antonio Grimani, then capitano and vice-mayor of Verona. Anna Giro took the title role in both works.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 439

Accademia Filarmonica in Verona.'*! Vitturi leaned towards more ensemble numbers than his peers.
The apparently dramatic role of the choruses in this work was illustrative, but choruses were becoming
a staple of works given at Sant' Angelo in the 1730s.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 696; Groppo 700; Wiel 345; Alm 858

Dorilla in Tempe Music mainly by Antonio Vivaldi'
[DoRILLA IN TEMPE]
A melodramma eroico-pastorale Text by Ant. Maria Lucchini, rev. Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1734-01-26
Without dedicatee

This revival of 1726/9, occurring as the third opera, opened with applause on 26 January 1734."
The cast was entirely changed from that of 1726. The absence of Anna Gird indicates that Vivaldi was
not in Venice at the time. The role of Dorilla was now taken by Anna Caterina Della Parte, with Francesco
Bilanzoni (Elmiro), Massimiliano Miller (Admeto), and Marta Arriggoni (Eudamia). In its current
incarnation, Dorilla was not well received (see 1734/4).

Score in I-Tn'*

Listed as Bonlini 698; Groppo 702; Wiel 343; Alm 860;'* RV 709a

Artaserse Music by Johann Adolf Hasse, rev. Baldassare Galuppi
[ARTAXERXES]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio!
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With I] marito all'ultima moda; balli SORTING DATE: 1734-01-30~

Dedicated to Eleonora Perlungo'

This revised version of 1730/7 was running on 30 January 1734 and was frequented by a great
concourse of attendees, particularly in relation to the rerun at Sant' Angelo (1734/2).'** According to
the libretto, it was significantly shortened. The cast retained only Carlo Broschi from the earlier
production. Gaetano Majorana sang in the title role, with Lucia Facchinelli (Mandane) and Francesco
Tolve (Artabano).

Score (1730) in I-Vnm;' arias (added by Galuppi) in I-CF

Listed as Bonlini 697; Groppo 701; Wiel 348; Alm 859

' With arias by Hasse, Giacomelli, and Leo.
'8 Diario ordinario, No. 2577, p. 10.

'84 Facs. edn. in DMV, xvii.

'85 A final page in the libretto announced that a collected edition of the works of Abbot Metastasio was in progress and that the first two volumes
were now available (for less than 30 /ire) from the Venetian bookseller Giuseppe Bettinelli.

86 By Domenico Lalli and Giovanni Boldini.

'7 Born Eleonora Taxis della Torre, her first marriage was to Antonio Vinciguerra, the count of Collalto, who died in 1718.
'88 Diario ordinario, No. 2577, p. 10.

' And numerous other sources: see the entry for 1730.

440

1734/4

m1

Oo

1734/5

rT

&
Ow

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

L'Olimpiade Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[THE OLYMPIAD]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1734-02-17
Without dedicatee

Heeding the advice of an oracle, Kleisthenes/Clistene (Marc' Antonio Mareschi), the tyrannical king
of Sikyon (on the Peloponnesian coast), separated his twins. He sent his son away to be raised under
a new identity and kept his daughter Aristeia (Anna Caterina Della Parte) nearby, where she grew to
be a beautiful young woman. He then offered her hand in marriage to the winner of the next Olympic
games. The noble Megakles (Francesco Bilanzoni), a frequent winner, fell in love with her. After being
attacked by bandits on the island of Crete, his life was saved by the stranger Lycis/Licida (Angela
Zannucchi). Lycis pined for the banished Argene (Marta Arrigoni), who was now disguised as a
shepherdess Licori. A medal enabled the king to determine that Lycis was his long-lost son.'

L 'Olimpiade was first performed, with applause, as the fourth opera!*! on 17 February 1734 (A, NV).'

It was the first work by Metastasio to be given at Sant' Angelo, which may have been trying to right
the wrong caused by audience preference for Artaserse (1734/3) at San Giovanni Grisostomo over its
own recent offering, Dorilla in Tempe (1734/2). The lifetime of Metastasio's text, first set by Caldara
for Vienna in 1733, endured through the setting of Cimarosa (Vicenza, 1784). Among its notable settings
was the pastiche version (with music by Riccardo Broschi, Hasse, Ariosti, and Porpora) given in London
the following autumn and the revised version of Goldoni, which was to be heard at San Giovanni
Grisostomo in Pergolesi's setting (1738/6). Almost all of the scenes  woods, countryside, grottos,
meadows  were exterior but apparently opulent. The final scene, outside a temple dedicated to Jupiter,
featured laurel and olive groves. Antonio Mauro designed the sets.

Score in I-Tn; arias in US- BEm

Listed as Bonlini 699; Groppo 703; Wiel 344; Alm 861; RV 725

Merope Music by Geminiano Giacomelli
[MEROPE]

A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1734-02-20

Dedicated to Karl August Friedrich of Waldeck'

The libretto for this revival of 1712/1 emphasized its debts to Aristotle and Guarini. The text remained
in use throughout the century. Among its notable settings were those of Alessandro Scarlatti (Naples,
1716), Jommelli (1741/6), Latilla (Venice, 1763), and Traetta (Milan, 1776). As a third drama, this
version was first performed on 20 February 1734 (A, NV).'TM Benigna reports that it was last performed
from 19:00 to 24:00 O.V. on 9 March [the last night of Carnival] and notes the participation of Carlo

' This account diverges substantially from others in which Kleisthenes (grandson) persuaded the oracle to spur the Spartans on to defeat
the Athenians, thereby paving the way for the establishment of democratic rule in the fifth century BC. Kleisthenes (grandfather) was a tyrant
whose beautiful daughter Agariste married Megakles.

'S! Even though identified as the terzo nuovo dramma in A and NV.

' Date confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 2586, p. 10.

' The prince regent was now also a count of the Holy Roman Empire.

' Date confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 2586, p. 10.

1734/6

ry

&
On

1734a

1734/7

i

&
Oo

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 441

Broschi as Merope's disguised son, Epitides. Lucia Facchinelli sang in the title role, with Francesco
Tolve as Polyphontes.'*> Gaetano Majorana took the role of Thrasymedes.

Score in A-Wgm;' B-Be; arias in F-Pn

Listed as Bonlini 700; Groppo 704; Wiel 346; Alm 862

Tirsi Music anonymous
[Tirst]

A dramma pastorale Text adapted by Pietro Chechia
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1734-02-22

Without dedicatee''

Tirsi was first performed on 22 February 1734 (A).' It is unclear whether it was an adaptation of (a)
Lemene's La ninfa Apollo (1709 et al; see 1734/7), (b) Creta's Filindo (1720/6), or (c) Nerina, Lalli's
revision of Filindo (San Samuele, 1728/6). Groppo and Sartori supported the first. Chechia's adaptation
as it appears in US-LAu (c) suggests the third, since it consists of a new title-page attached to the 1728
libretto. If the actual case is (c), then the cast list is highly improbable, since the singers who appeared
at Ascension 1728 would not have abandoned San Giovanni Grisostomo at the height of Carnival in
1734 to sing at San Moise. A revision of the 1720 work (b) to accommodate some characteristics (e.g.,
role names) from 1728 is a distinct possibility. Half a dozen provincial productions of Filindo in the
1720s involved Pietro Denzio (probably as impresario), and San Moise was his main base.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 701; Groppo 705; Wiel 351; Alm 863'

Le metamorfosi odiamorosi in Birba trionfale nelle gare delle terre amanti.Cf. 1732/4
and Suppl. 3a.

La ninfa Apollo Music by Baldassare Galuppi
[THE NYMPH APOLLO]

A favola pastorale Text adapted from Francesco de Lemene by Giovanni Boldini
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With La Pelarina;TM balli SORTING DATE: 1734-05-30

Dedicated to Carlo Salvetti?'

This popular pastoral, newly set by Galuppi, used essentially the same text as the 1709 work (Suppl.
5b), 1730/10, and 1734/6. At its opening performance, on 30 May 1734 (NV), La ninfa was received
with much appreciation (A). Prominent Neapolitans were particularly conspicuous at the concurrent
fair. The cast included Teresa Cotti (Filli), Livia Barbieri (Lilla), Angelo Maria Monticelli (Elpino),
and Giuseppe Appiani (Tirsi). The staging was undoubtedly more elaborate than that of the favola

5 Benigna, Memorie, f. 52. This was Farinelli's last appearance in Venice. He was engaged to sing, under Porpora's direction, at the Opera

of the Nobility in London from October 1734.

'6 Facs. edn. in DMV, xvii, with an introduction by Sylvie Mamy.

'' The dedication (by Domenico Lalli) addresses an unnamed Serenissima Altezza and cites his brother as the Serenissimo Elettore regnante.
'88 Diario ordinario, No. 2589, p. 11.
' This item is in the main a libretto for Nerina (1728/6) with a title-page for Tirsi (Alm, Catalog, pp. 543f.)

20 Not cited in the standard bibliographies, but Sartori 18305 links it with Ascension at San Samuele.

20! Salvetti's place of origin is undetermined, but Lalli noted in his dedication that this story was well-liked in Salvetti's patria.
2 See also the entries for Elpino (1702) and La ninfa Apollo (1726) in Suppl. 7.

2% The Diario ordinario, No. 2631, p. 6, notes the presence of the princes of Ottajano and of Chiusano (Avellino), as well as the count of
Conversano (Basilicata).

442

A

 1734b
1734/8

OB

fi

 1734c
1734/9

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

pastorale of 1709. The bailo at the end of Act One depicted a hunt in the Indian manner, while that
at the end of Act Two was for miners.

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 702; Groppo 706; Wiel 350; Alm 864

Music drama for the name-day of Louis XV. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Tamiri Music by Baldassare Galuppi?TM
[THOMyYRIS]

A dramma per musica Text by Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1734-11-17

Dedicated to Pedro Cebrian y Agustin, Count of Fuenclara>

When the Scythians fought the Greek forces of Constantinople, the handsome prince Klearchos (Castoro
Antonio Castorini), who was in charge of the defense, was taken prisoner. Thomyris, the queen of the
Massagetes, who was loved by two generals of her army (Pellegrin Tomi? and Giuseppe Todeschini),
fell in love with him. This first drama opened on 17 November 1734 (A, NV). A license to print
the libretto was dated 9 November 1734, which was also the date of dedication of the libretto. It appears,
however, that Tamiri was already being prepared for Sant' Angelo on 16 October.

Arias in D-KA; F-Pc; GB-Cfm; I-Gl, Mc

Listed as Bonlini 703; Groppo 707; Wiel 342; Alm 865

Belisario. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Demofoonte' Music by Gaetano Maria Schiassi?!
[DEMOPHON]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1734-12-26

Dedicated to Francesco Caraffa, Prince of Colobrano"!

Anoracle of Apollo demanded that a Thracian virgin be sacrificed to the god every year. King Demophon
(Annibale Pio Fabbri) was reluctant to comply. His son Timanthes (Antonio Bernacchi) was officially
engaged to the Phrygian princess Creusa (Giustina Gallo) but was secretly married to Dirkeia/Dircea
(Anna Maria Peruzzi), the current choice for the annual sacrifice. Unaware of his son's marriage,
Demophon sent his other son, Cherintos (Gioachino Conti, Egiziello), to fetch Creusa. It was
subsequently discovered that Dirkeia was actually Demophon's daughter. Cherintos, who will wed
Creusa, proves to be Demophon's true heir." Conti, a celebrated singer of coming decades, was making
his Venetian debut.

2 One aria (I-Mc) is attributed to Vivaldi.

25 The count was the Spanish ambassador to the Venetian Republic. On the 19th, the 42nd birthday of Elisabeth, the queen of Hungary, was
celebrated by the Austrian and Spanish ambassadors with a banquet and noble cantata (A, DO).

26 Tomi was a singer in the ducal chapel of San Marco.

2 Vitturi's note to the reader says that he saw in this story an idea that could be adapted to the conventions of the autumn season (Eccoti...un
picciolo dramma, il quale da me scritto con l'idea d'adattarlo, per quanto fosse possibile, alla dilettevole stagion dell'autunno).

28 Confirmed (as Tamiri Regina de' Sciti) in the Diario ordinario, No. 2703, p. 9, for the week ending 20 November [1734].

20 A rehearsal of Tomiri Regina delli Assirj is cited in the Diario ordinario, No. 2693, p. 2.

210 Schiassi (1698-1754) joined the service of the Landgrave of Darmstadt in 1737 but took up residence in Lisbon by April 1735.

2! Member of a wealthy Neapolitan family on good terms with the papacy.

2!2 The libretto is a forest of markings to indicate which arias among those printed were not to be sung and which ones, among those which
were to be sung, were borrowed from elsewhere.

COrR

1735/1

m1

&

OOo

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 443

Demofoonte opened in Venice on 26 December 1734 (A, NV), when it was received with general
appreciation and applause.?'? Fabbri, who was in the service of the emperor, and Conti were both
making their Venetian debuts. Metastasio's text had first been set by Caldara for performance in Vienna
on 4 November 1733. Schiassi's setting was the second of some 75 that can be counted through the
end of the century. The scenery, designed by Antonio Joli, invested particular effort in the arrival of
the Phrygian princess, whose entry was accompanied by the sound of barbarous instruments. The
temple of Apollo was shown in a state of utter confusion.

The libretto was the subject of some considerazioni addressed in a didactic letter from Edvardo Edesimo
to one of his friends dated 23 February 1735."* This letter was written in response to a libretto sent
to the writer, who obviously did not witness the production. At the start he emphasized the importance
of good taste, which he defined as an internal sentiment of pleasure' which needs to be expressed
in the details as well as the central subject. He then examined the way in which each character furthers
the drama. His opinion of Metastasio, whom he labeled learned and prudent, is extremely laudatory.'
He praised the nobility, splendor, and sweetness of [the works of] Apostolo Zeno, even while
acknowledging that in some quarters his debts to French drama were regarded as overly abundant.!
After this grand assessment of drama from the Greeks and Latins to his own times, he offered to show
his modest work, but it does not form part of this publication.

Score in B-Bc
Listed as Bonlini 705; Groppo 709; Wiel 353; Alm 868

Lucio Vero Music by Francesco Araya
(Lucius VERuS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1735-01-04

Dedicated to Nicole Benedetti, Duke of Ferentillo'

In this resetting of Zeno's text (C. F. Pollarolo; 1699/9), Pellegrin Tomi from the ducal chapel sang
in the title role, with Antonia Negri Tomi (La Mestrina) as Berenice. Although the text remained
popular throughout the century, this was the only later setting given in Venice. A second drama, it
opened on 4 January 1735 (A, NV), one day before the start of Carnival (NV). During the decades since
the text had first appeared, it had been set by several composers including Albinoni (Ferrara, 1713),
Gasparini (Rome, 1716), and Ariosti (London, 1727).'* Traetta was the last composer to set it (for St.
Petersburg, 1774).

Arias in F-Pe; D-DIb (now lost)

Listed as Bonlini 706; Groppo 710; Wiel 357; Alm 869

23 Diario ordinario, No. 2722, p. 8.

2\4 The Considerazioni are listed in Suppl. 3b.

2!5 Considerazioni, p. 9.

2'6 Considerazioni, pp. 41f.

217 Since 1730 the duke had ruled this small Umbrian holding, which previously belonged to the Cybo. The dedication was signed by the impresario
Cesare Gargante, who was cited by the Censori (I-Vas, Censori, Busta 6, entries of 18 and 23 febbraro 1738 M.V.) for failing to pay various

debts.

2!8 The pastiche called Lucio Vero given by the Middlesex Opera Company in England in 1747, contains selections from various works by
Handel but is not considered to be a derivative of the Araya/Zeno work.

444 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1735/2 L'Anagilda Music by Antonio Gaetano Pampani!
[ANAGILDA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Zaniboni'
mM Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival?)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1735-01-05~
& Dedicated to Leopoldo Ottavio della Torre [Torriano], Count of Valsassina and Taxis!

The story, generally considered to be a pastoralized version of La forza della virtit (1692/7), may be
indebted as well to the text of the Anagilda set by C. F. Pollarolo for Reggio Emilia (1685).Here the
story was related from the point of view of Rodrigo's brother, Accosta, the prince of Castile. Its action
took place in Toledo. Angela Zannucchi sang in the title role with Giacomo Zacchini as Sancio and
Alessandro Erba as Rodrigo. One scene featured a gallery of portraits of the kings of Castile.

 According to Groppo, the work had only two performances. The lapse was probably caused by the
death of the doge on 10 January rather than any deficiencies of the work. If the production opened
between the Sth and the 8th, it did not reopen after the installation of the new doge, Alvise Pisani, on
the 17th. Since San Cassiano had been closed for a number of years, it was an unfortunate time to relaunch
opera productions there.

A Score in D-Wa
Listed as Bonlini 709; Groppo 713; Wiel 355; Alm 872

 1735a Rosmonda. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1735/3 La clemenza di Tito Music by Leonardo Leo
[THE CLEMENCY OF TITUS]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Domenico Lalli
M1 Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1735-01-29
@ Dedicated to the Baron Hopken and Sig. Carlson?

CO The clemency of Titus, the son of Vespasian and emperor of Rome from 79 to 81 AD, was extended
in this work towards two young noblemen who were condemned by the Senate to die for their treachery.
This second drama was first performed on 29 January 1735 (A, NV).6 Annibale Pio Fabbri sang
in the title role, with Antonio Bernacchi (Sesto) and Gioacchino Conti (Annio) as the noblemen. The
scenery included recreations of the Campidoglio and Palatine Hills of Rome. Metastasio's libretto had
first been set by Caldara for the emperor's name-day (4 November) in 1734. It became enormously
popular. The longest-lived of later settings has been that of Mozart, on a text revised by Caterino Mazzola.
It was first given in Prague on 6 September 1791.

21 Called by several names, Pampano being the most frequent. He is named Pampino in this libretto. One member of the cast was Teresa Fortunata
Pampino (Florindo), whose relationship to the composer has not been established.

2 At least this is the received opinion, based on a decoding of the author's Arcadian pseudonym, but the story may have been inspired by
a 1685 text of the same title set by Pollarolo for Reggio Emilia. See 1692/10 as well comments on Gigli's La fede ne' tradimenti (set by Pollarolo
for Venice as 1705/7 and by Caldara for Rome in 1711).

2! The eldest son of Ferdinando della Torre, baron of Taxis, he held the hereditary position of imperial postmaster.
2 A variant was staged in Venice as 1749/3.

3 Groppo, MS, p. 239.

224 The doge was buried on the 18th (NV).

2S Said in the libretto to be cavaliers of the Swedish court, but they could have come to Venice by way of Russia, Poland, Prussia, Holland,
or Great Britain. No baptismal names are given. Lalli signed the dedication.

6 Confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 2736, p. 5. Carlo Ruzzini was succeeded by Alvise Pisani on the 17th, and three days of feasting
occurred on 19-21 January.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 445

fi Score in I-Ne; arias in F-Pc; US-We
Listed as Bonlini 707; Groppo 711; Wiel 354; Alm 870

1735/4 Caio Fabrizio Music by Johann Adolf Hasse
[CAIUS FABRITIUS]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1735-02-12
& Dedicated to Marchioness Ippolita Calcagnini'

The residents of Tarento, when succumbing to the advancing Romans, enlisted the help of Pyrrhos,
the king of Albania/Epiros and Macedonia. His friend Megades (who at the time was believed to be
the king) was killed in a battle preceded by a stampede of elephants. The delegation of Romans who
came to make peace was headed by Caius Fabritius. The negotiations were enlivened in this account
with plots involving Pyrrhos's wife (Bircenna) and Caius's daughter (Sestia).

Oo This third drama opened on 12 February 1735 (NV) and cannot have run for more than a week.
Pellegrin Tomi sang in the title role, with Castoro Antonio Castorini (Pirro), Maria Camati (Bircenna),
and Antonia Negri (Sestia). Numerous surviving scores demonstrate that Caio Fabrizio was already
well known from previous performances elsewhere. Among these was a production opening on 27
December 1732 for the inauguration of the Teatro Arciducale in Mantua. Caldara had been the first
to set the text (in 1729) for performance at the Viennese court. Hasse's work had had its first performance
in Rome on 12 January 1732. Handel conducted a pastiche (HWV A9) based mainly on this work in
London in December 1733. Caio Fabrizio was given in Naples in the winter of 1734, in Dresden in
the next summer, and in Berlin in 1766.

A Scores (Rome, 1732) in D-MUs; F-Pc; US-Cn; scores (London, 1733): I-Vc; scores (Dresden, 1734?)

in A-Wgm; D-DIb; score (Jaromeritz, 1734): I-Mc; scores (Berlin, 1766, et al.) in B-Bc, Br; D-Bs,
Hs; I-Vc, VIRE (n.d., inc.); US-We.
Listed as Bonlini 708; Groppo 712; Wiel 358; Alm 871

 1735b Ottaviano trionfante di Marc'Antonio. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

 1735 Cantata for the Societa Albrizziana. Cf. Suppl. 7.

 1735d Cantata for the name-day of Philip V of Spain. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

1735/5 Griselda Music by Antonio Vivaldi?*
[GRISELDA]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1735-05-18

rs) Dedicated to Federigo Valignano, Marquis of Cepagatti?*!

7 Not identified. The Calcagnini had holdings in the general regions of Ferrara, Bologna, Fusignano, Ancona, and further south into the province
of Puglia.

8 The theaters had been closed from the 7th through the 9th to mark the public entry of the new patriarch, Francesco Antonio Correr (A),
possibly upsetting plans to open them earlier. The production was squeezed on the far end, too, by a jubilee beginning on the 19th, three days
before Shrove Tuesday (NV).

9 Here nicknamed La Farinella.
230 Here identified as maestro di cappella to both Francis Stephen, the duke of Lorraine, and Prince Philip, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt.

23! A descendant [d. 1753; spelled Valignini in the libretto] of ancient Roman counts in whose lineage Pope Innocent III would have found.
He undertook the restoration of the family castle (near Pescara) in 1730 and was active in the Arcadian colony under the name Nivalgo Aliarteo.

446 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

 In this textual revision of 1728/3, Oronta, the daughter of Gualtiero and Griselda, was renamed Costanza.
She was now loved by the Athenian prince Roberto, the brother of Conrad/Corrado. This setting of
Griselda was first performed on 18 May 1735, when it was received with universal enjoyment (A).
The production continued for fifteen days (NV).? The cast included Gregorio Balbi (Gualtiero),
Margherita Giacomazzi (Costanza), and Gaetano Valletta (Roberto).

O According to Goldoni, Griselda was received as though the text were new and the prima donna (Anna
Gird) were appearing in her debut performance. Goldoni recounted how Vivaldi dismissed the
dramatist's criticism that Gird did not have a strong voice and reported that, in the actual event, the
performance was marvelous.*TM To the contrary, the Florentine nobleman Luca Casimiri degli Albizzi
wrote to Vivaldi on 4 June saying that Florentines returning from Venice reported that La Giraud
could not be heard at all in San Samuele.?* Then impresario at the Teatro della Pergola in Florence,
Albizzi had invited Vivaldi in April to write an opera for Carnival 1736 but now questioned Vivaldi's
insistence that Gird sing in the lead role.*

o- Griselda was already a popular subject on the musical stage. Antonio Bononcini's setting of this text
had been given in Milan in 1718 and Giovanni Bononcini's setting of Paolo Rolli's text was given in
London in 1722.?* One of the last settings of Zeno's text was Latilla's for San Cassiano (1751/7). The
Griselda which was produced at San Samuele in the autumn of 1735, with two new intermezzi, was
anew (apparently spoken) tragicommedia by Goldoni (cf. Suppl. 3a). Its requirements differed from
those of this text, which Goldoni claimed to have assassinated for Vivaldi's use.?*

A Score in I-Tn; arias in D-B; GB-Lbl; I-MC
Listed as Bonlini 711; Groppo 715; Wiel 360; Alm 874; RV 718

 1735e Aristide. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
 1735f La Griselda (commedia}. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1735/6 L'inganno scoperto Pastiche based on music by Antonio Vivaldi
[THE DECEPTION DISCOVERED]
A melodramma per musica Text attributed to Alvise Giusti
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1735-11-12
a Without dedicatee
Oe This pastoral was based on the alleged practice of shepherds to hold weddings and celebrate other rites

on May Day (1 May) with games and dances. It was situated in Thessaly. The plot was indebted to
Lucchini's Dorilla in Tempe (set by Vivaldi as 1726/9 and revived as 1734/2), but Dorilla has been

23 The date is also confirmed in the Diario ordinario (No. 2780, p. 11), which indicates that the fair was again well attended by Neapolitans.
With them was Count [Giulio] Visconti, the new viceroy (1733-34) of Naples, who arrived on the 17th and was said to be looking forward
to the Ascension fair and to the opera pastorale.

33 Memorie, i, 190.

4 Goldoni, Memorie, i, 198f.

235 Holmes, Opera Observed, p. 41.
256 Loc. cit.

37 Strohm, Opernarien, ii, 151.

238 Ortolani, TO, x, 1231f. The intermezzi, both on texts by Goldoni, were L 'ippocondriaco and II filosofo. Ortolani speculates that the music
for the first was by Maccari or Apolloni and that for the second by Maccari or Vivaldi. Giuseppe Imer played opposite Elisabetta Passalacqua
in both works.

2 Facs. edn., IOB, xxxv. Also ed. Renato Fasano (Palermo, 1985).

1735/7

i

ra)
700

1735/8

A

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 447

renamed Chryssis/Criside.* L 'inganno opened on 12 November 1735, when it elicited universal
satisfaction (A).4' It was still running on 3 December. The cast included Pellegrin Tomi (Admeto),
Antonia Negri Tomi (Criside), Francesco Arrigoni (E/miro), and Giustina Gallo (Eudamia). Rusticity
is greatly emphasized in the scenery. The work opens with a grand view of the countryside (including
woods, hills, gardens, and trellises covered with flowers). Act One ends with a hunt for wild animals.
Act Three opens near a vast beach and concludes with a scene full of fountains.

Aria in F-PcTM?

Listed as Bonlini 713; Groppo 717; Wiel 356; Alm 876

Cesare in Egitto Music by Geminiano Giacomelli
[CAESAR IN EGYPT]

A dramma per musica Text by Giacomo Francesco BussaniTM?
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1735-11-24

Dedicated to Louis, Count of SalbourgTM

Bussani's libretto (Giulio Cesare in Egitto), set by Sartorio as 1676/6, concerned the conflict between
political duty and its defiance by the passions of love. It had been the basis for Handel's like-named
work (HWV 17; 1724). Among its other settings was that of Predieri (Rome, 1728). Cesare was first
performed in Venice on 24 November 1735 (A), but it had been staged in Milan the preceding January.
Cesare was still running on 3 December. The journalist Trebbi called it a marvel (A). The cast
included Felice Salimbeni (Giulio Cesare), Vittoria Tesi Tramontini (his wife, Cornelia), Angelo
Amorevoli (Jolomeo), and Margherita Giacomezzi (his sister, Cleopatra).

Score in B-Bc (1732?)

Listed as Bonlini 714; Groppo 718; Wiel 352; Alm 877

Venceslao* Composer(s) unknown
[WENCESLAS]

A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1735-12-26

Dedicated to Joseph Friedrich, Prince of Saxony-Hildburghausen*

This story, first set by C. F. Pollarolo as 1703/4 and reset as the pastiche 1722/5, was situated in
Krakow. This version opened with the Polish army leading a large contingent of enchained slaves.
Venceslao opened on 26 December 1735 (A, NV), when it was received with universal applause (A);
the title-page was dated 1736. In this production Angelo Tramontini took the title role, with Felice
Salimbeni and Giovanni Cupilli as his sons Casimir and Alexander. Margherita Giacomazzi was cast
as Eirenike, whom both sons loved.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 715; Groppo 719; Wiel 366; Alm 879

240 Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 619) links the work, improbably, with Lucchesi's // conte Caramella (Bonn, 1773).

>| The same report appears in the Diario ordinario, No. 2859, p. 2.
24 An aria added by Galuppi (S. Angelo 1736) is in F-Pc.

24 Allacci (Drammaturgia, edition of 1655, col. 181) said the text was revised by Goldoni.

4 The count managed the war chest of the emperor.

245 The date is confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 2862, p. 9.

246 The prince was present in Venice during the week ending 21 January 1736 (Diario ordinario, No. 2886). Hasse wrote on 11 February that
he took with him to Vienna a solo cantata for the bride [Maria Theresia] (Pancino, Hasse, p. 353).

47 This music of the 1722 work was by Porta, A. Pollarolo, and Gio. Maria Capelli.

448

1735/9

A

 1736a
1736/1

mM

G

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Elisa, regina di Tiro Music by Baldassare Galuppi
[ELISSA, QUEEN OF TYRE]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from A. Zeno and P. Pariati by Domenico Lalli
Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli* SORTING DATE: 1735-12-27

Dedicated to Franz Wilhelm Rudolf, Count of Hohenems

In this adaptation of Astarto (1708/7), which opened on 27 December 1735 (A, NV), Abdastartos, the
king of Tyre, was killed by his nurse's son, Sychaios, who ruled for the next twelve years. His daughter
Elissa (Antonia Negri Tomi), who succeeded him upon his death, was eventually married to Abdastartos's
son, Astartos, who presented himself as Klearchos (Rosa Maddalena Cardina).* In comparison to the
version of 1708, the reworking is, atypically, more dignified than its model in its brevity, its de-emphasis
of disguise, and its substitution of balli for the celebrated intermezzi of Vespetta e Pimpinone, which
were first performed with the 1708 work. The title-page is dated 1736.

Arias in B-Be; D-Dlb; F-Pc; S-Skma

Listed as Bonlini 716; Groppo 720; Wiel 364; Alm 880

Rinaldo da Montalbano. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

L' Alessandro nell' Indie Music by Johann Adolf Hasse?"
[ALEXANDER IN INDIA]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio, rev. Michel Angiolo Boccardi
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With unspecified intermezzi* and balli SORTING DATE: 1736-01-28

Dedicated to the Marquis [Antonio?] Botta?

Metastasio's text on Alexander's last campaign (1730) had been set at least seven times previously.
Under the title Cleofide, Hasse's version (and his earliest setting of a work by Metastasio) had first
been given in Dresden 13 September 1731. Its earliest setting in Venice was Pescetti's (1732/1). Vivaldi
adapted Hasse's version for performance in Ferrara for the Carnival of 1737. He was instructed to shorten
the work because operas which last four hours are unacceptable in Ferrara.**

This third drama, first performed in Venice on 28 January 1736 (A),** received the full applause
of the city (NV). Angiolo Amorevoli sang in the title role, with Castoro Antonio Castorini (Poro) and
Vittoria Tesi Tramontini (Cleofide). The production was still in progress on 11 February, when Hasse
wrote to Francesco Riva, the secretary to the duke of Modena, that the work was having a better reception
than he ever would have imagined. The theater is always full. We have had twelve recitations so far;
only four remain. By the time they are finished, we hope to have sold 12,000 bollettini, something which
is very rare in Venice, even with the best companies. The current one at San Giovanni Grisostomo is
weakened by the absence of our gifted Felicino [Salimbeni]; all the merit of our work is attributed either

248 The libretto was signed by Giovanni Gallo, who choreographed the dances.

249 Identified only as the count of Hohenebs [sic] in the libretto, Franz Wilhelm Rudolf was a field-marshal and imperial cavalry officer.

259 The story may have been derived from Josephus.

251

Hasse was now identified as the maestro di cappella at the Ospedale degli Incurabili.

282 Here probably meaning combattimenti, since the subject was military and San Giovanni Grisostomo was notoriously averse to comic intermezzi.

253 The family came from Florence. The dedicatee was a [lieu]tenant of the Hapsburgs. It is impossible to confirm that he was Antonio Botta
Adorno, who became regent of the Grand Duchy of Tuscany in 1757.

254 Heller, Cronologia, p. 61.

255 Date confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 2891, p. 11.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 449

to the text or to the music....I hope...that our incomparable Metastasio will not be displeased with me
and my...undertaking...of putting his divine verses into music.?

wS No opportunity to dramatize the staging, directed by Antonio Joli, was lost. As the curtain opened, Poros's
soldiers were seen to be fleeing. Alexander's camp, shown in Act Two, included elephants, carriages,
and machines of war. Such scenes were interspersed with the backdrops of royal premises. Views
of the temple of Bacchus were used in Acts One and Three.

A Scores (Dresden, 1731) in D-B, DIlb, LEm; F-Pc; score (Venice, 1736) in GB-LbI; arias et al. in D-B,
Dib, Mbs (sinfonia); US-FAy*
Listed as Bonlini 717; Groppo 721; Wiel 365; Alm 881

 1736b Don Giovanni. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1736/2 Mandane Music by Ignazio Fiorillo***
[MANDANE]
A dramma per musica Text by Bartolomeo Vitturi
rd Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1736-02-04
rs) Without dedicatee
 Continuing the story related in 1709/13, in the midst of war between Media and Persia [sixth century

B.C. ], the Median Astyages (Pellegrin Tomi) enlisted the help of the Lydian king Alyattes/Aliate. Alyattes
and his son were both killed in battle, but the Median princess Mandane (Antonia Negri Tomi) and
her young son Cyrus survived. Their palace was seen to be burning in the final scene of this work.
This third drama opened on 4 February 1736 (NV).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 718; Groppo 722; Wiel 363; Alm 882

1736/3 La generosita politica Music by Giovanni Maria Marchi*!
[POLITICAL GENEROSITY]
A dramma per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni?
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1736-05-09
a Dedicated to General Neuperg

Nicaia/Nicia swore a vendetta against Peisistratos (Settimio Canini), the Athenian leader who killed
her father. When her suitors Perikles (Maria Camati) and Orontes (Angela Zannucchi) both tried to
further her aims, Peisistratos disarmed them with his generosity. The text shares several roles with those
in Domenico Lalli's Pisistrato (Dolo, 1711; Naples, 1714).

256 Pancino, Hasse, pp. 353f. After singing in Venceslao at San Giovanni, Salimbeni (who was under the protection of the emperor) moved
to San Cassiano, where he sang in La Zoe. Pancino suggests that Hasse intended that he should take the role of Poros in Alessandro. If the
goal of selling 12,000 bollettini was actually realized in sixteen days, the average sales per performance would have been 750.

*57 Hasse's letter (Pancino, /oc. cit.) noted that on the 15th two extracts from Alessandro were to be sent to Vienna for the archduchess and
her daughter, Maria Theresa, who was to wed Francis Stephen of Lorraine (1708-65) on 12 February 1736. It was a condition of the wedding
that the duke of Lorraine exchange his duchy for the Grand Duchy of Tuscany.

58 The Neapolitan Fiorillo (1715-87) was later a conductor at the court at Brunswick. This was his second opera and his first for Venice.
 Vitturi noted in the libretto that it contained many flaws, owing to the fact that it had to be printed in one day and one night.

26 Date confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 2895, p. 9.

26! From Milan.

2 With debts to the Pisistrato (1711) of Domenico Lalli, who signed the dedication.

?6 General of the emperor's infantry and commander in Luxembourg. He had negotiated the initial peace with the Turks at Belgrade.

450 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

oO8 The production of Goldoni's first opera seria opened on 9 May 1736 with ordinary applause (A,
NV). Like works for Giovedi Grasso, this one required a relatively small cast of five. The production
closed on the 27th with a banquet and a ball attended by a large number of [local] nobles and foreign
patricians. It was given in the grand style of earlier banquets at San Giovanni Grisostomo to mark
the end of Carnival. On the 1 8th the French ambassador, Charles-Frangois de Froullay, invited the work's
ballarine to a luncheon with his mother. This aroused the suspicion ofa Venetian government agent.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 719; Groppo 723; Wiel 367; Alm 883

 1736c Il tributo degli dei. Cf. Suppl. 6.
 1736d Serenata for the name-day of Louis XV of France. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
 1736e La fondazion di Venezia. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
1736/4 La Zoe Music by Luca Antonio Predieri
[Zo]
A dramma per musica Text by Francesco Silvani
im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With a ballo' SORTING DATE: 1736-11-10
am Dedicated to Jose Carrillo di Alborfioz, a Spanish Grandee*
coI@) The text appears to have been revised from that of La forza del sangue (1711/8). The production opened

on 10 November 1736 with universal applause (A, NV). The cast included Lucia Facchinelli (Zoe)
and Pietro Baratta (Foca).

fi No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 722; Groppo 726; Wiel 361; Alm 886

1736/5 Ergilda Music by Baldassare Galuppi
[ERGILDA]
A dramma per musica Text by Bartolomeo Vitturi
rT Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1736-11-12
& Dedicated to Marquis Ottavio Casnedi?

264 Diario ordinario, No. 2933, p. 10.

265 The substitution of a serious work by Goldoni for the pastoral set the preceding year by Vivaldi was a true departure for San Samuele, which
had shaped the short spring season around lighter subjects. Had the theater then desired Vivaldi's services, they probably would have been
unavailable: Giovanni Battista Vivaldi, the composer's father, died after a long illness on 14 May.

266 Vas, IS, RC, Busta 559, entry of 23 May 1736. The ballarine are not identified in the libretto. We know only that they were led by Gaetano
Grossatesta.

67 Bonlini (MS) notes cryptically the title Le nozze di Psiche (cf. Suppl. 6/1732) following his citation of this work.

268 On Sunday the 23rd a large delegation of attendees, including the family of the ambassador of Spain, were stopped at the entrance to their
box by a guard who objected to the weapons borne by the ambassador's courier (I-Vas, IS, RC, Busta 559, entry of 27 November 1736).

26 Vivaldi referred in his letter of 3 Novembre 1736 to Marquis Guido Bentivoglio (US-NYpm, MFC V855.X) to his inability to travel on
account of responsibilities to San Cassiano. He had refused to compose an opera for 90 zecchini. Although he could have been concertmaster
there, he said, the career of instrumentalist was beneath his dignity. His letter of 26 December (see 1736/6 and 1737/10) complained of the
weaknesses of the current impresari at San Cassiano and Sant' Angelo.

27 Casnedi was the superintendent of police in Milan as well as an avid collector of paintings (e.g., by Alessandro Magnasco [1667-1749]
and Giuseppe Nogari [1699-1763] ). This interest was shared by other members of his family, among whom was a founding member of the
Freemasons' Lodge in Milan (1756).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 451

 In this plot from Tacitus, Segestes looked outside Sicily for help in fighting his old enemy Selinunte.
This led him to join the Roman legions in the Rhineland. Segestes ended up being rescued by Germanicus,
who in this account captured Ergilda, the pregnant wife of Arminius. Ergilda was first performed on
12 November 1736 with universal applause (A, NV).?! It was still running on the 29th.

A Score in B-Be; arias in B-Bc; D-Dlb; S-Skma
Listed as Bonlini 721; Groppo 725; Wiel 362; Alm 885

1736/6 L'Arsace* Music by Geminiano Giacomelli
[ARSAKES]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Antonio Salvi by Giovanni Boldini
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1736-12-26
wz Dedicated to [Otto Ferdinand?] of Traun?
 This revival of 1717/11 was first performed on 26 December 1736 (A). The title-page is dated 1737.

Vivaldi's letter of November 3 (see La Zoe, 1736/4) implied that he would be engaged into the winter
at San Cassiano. He may have been concertmaster for this production, despite his disparagement of
such employment. He expressed dismay on the date this work opened that this year the impresarios
[at San Cassiano and Sant' Angelo] have little experience. Pietro Baratta sang in the title role, with
Teresa Baratta (Rosmira) and Lucia Facchinelli (Statira). Teresa Peruzzi (La Denzia) was one of
the performers in a revival given in Graz in 1737.
A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 723; Groppo 727; Wiel 373; Alm 887

1737/1 Ciro riconosciuto Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi
[CyRUS RECOGNIZED]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1737-01-05
& Dedicated to Count Paolo Martinengo, N. V.
ad

Drawn along the same lines as Pariati's text (1709/13) but also tangentially related to the subject of
Vitturi's 1736/2 account, this plot recounts how Astyages, the wicked ruler of Media, was succeeded
by Cyrus, who consolidated the Persian empire.? A setting of the same text by Jommelli would be
given at San Giovanni Grisostomo as1749/11. Metastasio's text had only recently been set by Caldara
for performance at the imperial summer residence, La Favorita, on 28 August 1736.' Caldara had died
exactly one week before this performance opened.

 This second drama was first performed in Venice on 5 January 1737 (A), one day before the opening
of Carnival, when it was received with universal applause.? In another account its opening elicited

21! This date (for Eregilda) is also confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3014, p. 2, which follows the wording of Pietro Donado's avviso
of 17 novembre 1736. Sebastiano Trebbi's of the same date suggests that the work opened on the 11th.

?? Apparently Otto Ferdinand Traun. The count was an Austrian field marshal who played decisive roles in the wars of the Polish (1733-38)
and Austrian (1740-48) Successions. The count was asked ina letter of 30 March 1740 to help secure the services of the Imer troupe (see I-MAas,
AG, Carteggio da Venezia, Busta 3170/2, entry for 1740).

 Letter to Guido Bentivoglio of 26 decembre 1736 (quoted in Giazotto, Vivaldi, p. 305).

2TM The use of Metastasio's text can be read as an effort to improve on Vitturi's gloss on related subjects in Mandane (1736/2).
275 Sonneck's Catalogue claimed that some music was by Caldara, but this seems highly unlikely.

276 Diario ordinario, No. 3038, p. 7.

452

1737/2

V1

&


1737/3

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

universal applause and enjoyed an incredible attendance (NV). Apparently it was still running on
the 19th, when a servant of the papal legate attended without wearing the appropriate livery.'
Lorenzo Ghirardi, who gave his debut performance in the title role, appears to have been the subject
of an intelligence report citing that young musician who pleased...all of Venice and thus brought
praise to the Marquis Casanelli of Milan, who had recommended him to the impresario [Antonio Denzio]
of the opera.' Cesare Grandis sang as Astyages, with Denzio as Mithridates.

Arias in B-Bc; I-CF, TLp

Listed as Bonlini 724; Groppo 728; Wiel 370; Alm 888, 889

Il Demetrio Music by Johann Adolf Hasse
[DEMETRIOS]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1737-01-15

Dedicated to Count Francesco Perlongo

This revival of 1732/3 opened on 15 January 1737 (NV).* Vivaldi twice declined to provide a work

for this slot at San Cassiano, first because he was offered only 90 zecchini, then, when offered 100

zecchini, because he regarded San Cassiano as poorly organized, yet [having] high ticket prices. Also

he was preparing works for performance in Ferrara. In the actual event, he was prohibited from entering

Ferrara by the papal legate, so two works by Hasse (this one and Alessandro nell'Indie, [1736/1] with

revisions by Vivaldi) were substituted for the ones Vivaldi had planned (his own Ginevra [RV 716,

Florence, 1736] and Olimpiade [RV 725], 1734/4)2*!

In both locales, Demetrio found much favor with gentlemen (cavalieri), somewhat to Vivaldi's dismay.

The role of Cleonike was taken by Lucia Facchinelli in Venice and by Anna Gire in Ferrara. The cast

for San Cassiano also included Felice Salimbeni (A/ceste) and Pietro Baratti (Fenicio). Demetrio was

revived, after 1737/4, for the last two nights of Carnival.?

Scores in B-Bc (Dresden, 1740); D-Dlb (Dresden, 1740); F-Pc (Dresden, 17407); I-Vnm (Venice, 1732);
arias in D-Dlb (Dresden, 1740); US-BEm (CAi), Cn; I-Vc, Vnm

Listed as Bonlini 725; Groppo 729; Wiel 372; Alm 890

Lugrezia romana in Costantinopoli Music by Giacomo Maccari
(LUCRETIA, A ROMAN IN CONSTANTINOPLE]

A dramma comico in musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Given at San Samuele SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and cori SORTING DATE: 1737-02-09~

In this parody of earlier serious dramas, the Venetian slave Mirmicaina (known as Regina [the Queen]
in Venice) is about to be crowned the Turkish empress when the emperor, Albumazar, is told by
Ruskamar, the keeper of his harem, that a beautiful white woman has been discovered on a Black
Sea beach. The emperor promises Mirmicaina to Ruskamar if his new discovery, Lucretia, is pleasing

271 Vas, IS, RC, Busta 551, entry of 8 February 1736 M.V. On the stage use of the livery of diplomatic personnel, see 1738/2.
278 Op. cit., entry of 8 January 1736 M.V.

2 An imperial regent.

28 Confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3041, p. 5.

?8! Both Ferrarese productions were marred by disputes between Vivaldi and the impresario, Abbot G. M. Bollani. Meanwhile Vivaldi had
failed to procure the services of the Modenese contralto Maria Maddalena Pieri for the Florentine impresario Albizzi, who claimed he had
been deceived by Vivaldi (Holmes, Opera Observed, pp. 43f, 96, 100).

2 See Vivaldi letters of 3 Novembre 1736 (cited above), 29 Dicembre 1736, and 2 gennaio 1737 (Giazotto, Vivaldi, pp. 305-307).
?8 Groppo, MS, p. 244.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 453

to the emperor. Before such a pairing can occur, the short, fat Lucretia and the tall, thin Mirmicaina
have an on-stage fight. Even the choruses are satirical. Albumazar chastises Lucretia for thinking that
the music of the Turkish women is arabiata.* The action is said to take place in Constantinople.

oo Lugrezia was given by the comedy troupe in the tempo della commedia in 1737. While this is an
ambiguous designation, circumstantial evidence suggests that it was given in the later half of Carnival
1737.78 By one account, the audience only laughed at Mirmicaina, with whose coronation the work
opens. Singing in Venetian dialect,*' she exhorts  in contrast to the friends, Romans, countrymen
of Julius Caesar  bastards, soldiers, eunuchs, common people, and rabble to court my favor by
speaking Italian ... even if you are Islamic.**

en Under Goldoni's direction the comedy troupe at San Samuele regularly ridiculed the pretentiousness
of modem representations of antiquity, particularly the false use of Graeco-Roman settings in the staging
of works by Zeno and Metastasio. However, models predating Goldoni seem to exist for this work.?
The choice of roles could also have been influenced by Buini's scherzo musicale called Albumazar
(1727/6), which dealt with Turkish-Bolognese (as opposed to Turkish-Venetian) relations. In a
mischievous introduction, Goldoni said that the displacement of people from their customary venues
and time-frames should be attributed to poetic license. The text lingered in the public mind and reappeared
as a farsa giocosa set in 1800 by Vittorio Trento for San Moise.

A No musical sources known
Bonlini 726; Groppo 730; Wiel 375; Alm 891; Sartori 14532

1737/4 Lucio Papirio Music by Nicold Porpora
[Lucius Papirius]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Antonio Salvi?!
i Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1737-02-16
& Dedicated to Benedetta Antiope, Countess della Torre and Taxis
Oo@ Salvi's account of Lucius Papirius leading the Romans to war against the Samnites had been treated

in 1715/1. The dictatorship of Quintus Fabius is highlighted in this account, which was said to be based

284 4 pun on the Italian word for angry, the etymology of which can be understood as either made wrathful (from rabbia) or arabified
(from arabo). The text of the chorus is Dupraiasche acla acla/Stoccamathe fataka/ Uzcha, Muzcha/Schiallaacbe aela aela.

85 Tt is curious that Groppo (MS, p. 244) gives the work a number, because normally he does not give official status to comedies, even when
sung, until the 1750s.

86 The comedians were generally unopposed by opera productions in the autumn, and some of their best efforts went into their openings nights
in October, However, Scannapieco (Alla ricerca, p. 17) calls attention to Goldoni's own differentiation (in the preface to Osmano, re di
Tunisia; see Suppl. 3a, entry of 1738) between tragedies (works for serious people) and comedies (works for people wearing masks, that is,
those attending Carnival who are removed from their normal identities). Bonlini's placement of this work in his addendum suggests the position
adopted here.

287 Ortolani, TO, x, 1261.

28 Ola, principi, nati/Del mio sangue real, benche bastardi,/Soldati, eunuchi, popolo, canaglia,/Udite il mio comando: oggi ciascuno,/Benche
sia maomettano, Se brama il mio favor, parli italiano.

28 The drama itself was inspired by Giovanni Bonicelli's Lucrezia romana of 1693 (Suppl. 3a). Ortolani (TO, x, 1261) says the plots had been
in use in Venice for roughly a half century and sees some convergence in Goldoni's version with techniques used in Rutsvanscad (1724, Suppl.
3a). A scenario for Lucrezia romana was in circulation among comedy troupes (Cotticelli et al., Commedie, pp. 494 ff). Allacci, Drammaturgia,
col. 492, describes the work as an opera bernesca.

2% Information possibly misinterpreted in NGDMM/2, which notes that the work was given in Trent in 1800!

2! By Domenico Lalli and/or Giovanni Boldini. Alm (Catalog, p. 564) indicates that Lalli added only one scene; Boldini is credited with revisions
only by Wiel. The accepted attribution to Salvi seems arguable. In title and construction the work seems closer to Zeno's Lucio Papirio dittatore
(set by A. Pollarolo as 1720/9) than to Salvi's Lucio vero (set by C. F. Pollarolo as 1699/9 and Araya as 1735/1).

2% She was born the princess of Collalto and was identified as Venetian patrician and a dame of the Order of the Cross. She was the wife of
Leopoldo della Torre and the mother of Leopoldo Ottavio (see Anagilda, 1735/2).

454

1737/5

1737/6

Op

A

 1737a

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

on Livy. This third drama was first performed on 16 February 1737 (A).? Antonio Barbieri sang
in the title role, with Felice Salimbeni (Quinto Fabio), Pietro Baratti (Marco Fabio), and Lucia Facchinelli
(Emilia).

Arias in A-Wn

Listed as Bonlini 727; Groppo 731; Wiel 374; Alm 892

Artaserse Longimano Music by Gaetano Antonio Pampani?TM*
[ARTAXERXES LONGIMAN]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Giovanni Boldini
Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1737-02-19

Dedicated to Zaccaria Canal, N. V.2%

This tale about Xerxes was related through the deeds of the young Artaxerxes Longiman. The Greek
captain Themistocles traveled incognito in Persia to ask his enemy for asylum. Although his intention
was hostile, Themistocles was torn between the generosity of his unwitting host and his loyalty to his
homeland. His dilemma was resolved when the noble Xerxes, facing death, asked for peace with the
Greeks.

This third drama opened on 19 February 1737 (A, NV). Lorenzo Ghirardi sang in the title role, with
Cesare Grandis as Themistocles. Another hint of the possibility that Sant' Angelo's winter season was
a memorial to the recently deceased Caldara lies in the fact that this work, given in succession to Ciro
(1737/1), was based on Metastasio's Temistocle. Caldara's setting of it for the emperor's name-day
(4 November 1736) was his last composition.

No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 728; Groppo 732; Wiel 371; Alm 893

L'Alvilda Music by Baldassare Galuppi
[ALvILDa]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Domenico Lalli
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1737-05-29

Dedicated to Robert Raymond?

This text, derived from L amor generoso (set by Gasparini as 1707/13), had been adapted by Santo
Lapis for La fede in cimento (1730/2). L 'Alvilda was first performed, to keep foreigners entertained,
on 29 May 1737 (A). The cast included Giacomina Ferrari (Alvilda), Nicola La Reginella (Aldano),
and Francesco Ciandrini (Frilevo).

Aria in I-Gl

Listed as Bonlini 729; Groppo 733; Wiel 376; Alm 894

Endimione. Cf. Suppl. 7.

23 Confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3054, p. 2.

2 Pampani (c. 1705-1775) was principally active in Fano, Urbino, Pesaro, and other locales in the marche.

5 Canal was a procurator of San Marco. The dedicatee may also have been the like-named notary who had clients from the Dalmatian coast.

2% As Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench (1733-37), this peer may have been in the delegation of Frederick Louis, the prince of Wales
(disguised as the count of Albania) and eldest son of George II, who arrived in Venice the night before this work opened (I-Rvat, AS, NV,
N. 190, f.258v). Princess Augusta of Saxe-Gotha, whom he had married in 1736, was pregnant at this time and is unlikely to have been present.

*" The date, from Trebbi's avviso of 1 June, is confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3097, p. 8. The reference to foreigners is found in Trebbi's
avviso of the preceding week. It is likely that the work was also attended by Karl-Albrecht, the elector of Bavaria, and his wife, Maria Amalia,
the archduchess of Austria, who arrived in Venice around the 28th (Benigna, Memorie, f. 61). Another foreigner, according to the Diario,
was the count of Cham.

 1737b
1737/7

i

fa
OOLa

1737/8

o

&S

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 455

La Galatea. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Ezio Music by Giovanni Battista Lampugnani?*
[AETIUS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Pietro Metastasio
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With Erminia e Tiburzio; balli SORTING DATE: 1737-11-16

Dedicated to Fulvia Visconti Clerici*

Ezio opened on 16 November 1737 (NV),*"' when it elicited universal satisfaction (A). The orchestra
included trombe da caccia together with strings and woodwinds. Giuseppe Appiani sang in the title
role, with Marianna Marini as Fulvia and Giovanni Trivulzi as Valentinian. Cesare Argante, the
impresario for this season at Sant' Angelo, was served notice by the Council of Ten on 9 December
that a payment of 30 zecchini to Marianna Marini was overdue. On the 12th the Council threatened
to suspend the production and close the theater if the money was not paid forthwith.*? Metastasio's
text, treating the defeat of Attila, had long been popular. Porta's setting was given at San Giovanni
Grisostomo as 1728/8. Lampugnani's setting had premiered in Milan on 26 December 1735.5
Score in I-BAs

Listed as Bonlini 731; Groppo 735; Wiel 369; Alm 896

Rosbale Music by Nicole Porpora
[ROSBALE]

A dramma per musica Text by Claudio Nicola Stampa
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1737-11-23

Dedicated to Luis Reggio y BranciforteTMTM

Rosbale was surprised by the military force called forth by the Tartar emperor Sirbakes in order to restore
the Moghul throne (on which Rosbale now sat) to the deposed Sarabes. When Rosbale's own son was
killed in battle by Sirbakes, he made it a condition of peace that should Sirbakes also die, Sarabes's
only daughter would ascend the Tartar throne. This came to pass.

Rosbale, the first work to be produced under the new impresario Carlo Goldoni, had its premiere on
23 November 1737 (NV). It was reported to have been well received (assai applaudita) and thus
to have drawn a very full house (pienissimo |'uditorio) (A). The Neapolitan Francesco Tolve sang in
the title role, with Carlo Scalzi as Sirbace.* Scalzi had probably returned from England with Porpora,
who resigned from the Opera of the Nobility after composing the wedding music for the prince of Wales
(May 1736) and briefly resumed his post at the Incurabili.

Antonio Joli's sets and the staging generally were highly imaginative. Situated in the Moghul capital,
Agra, the work opened showing it set for a military siege. The forces were divided by the Gemma River,

28 | ampugnani (1708-88) was born and died in Milan but he worked in various venues including Venice and London. His musical style was

somewhat like that of Vivaldi but its reception was often indifferent.

2 For unexplained reasons it is attributed to Bartolomeo Vitturi in NGDMM/2. Except for the elimination of one scene in Act One, the libretto
seems to correspond to the one set by Porpora.

30 In 1733 she married Anton Giorgio Clerici, son of a prominent Milanese family. From 1739 he was a Knight of Golden Fleece.

30! Cited also in the Diario ordinario, No. 3170 (16 Novembre), p. 7, as a work about to go into production, and in number No. 3172, p. 10,
as a work that had opened seven days previously.

3 T.Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 46, Fasc. 1737, items of 9 and 12 Dicembre 1737.
3% See RISM AII listing No. 8973.

34 Prince of Campo Fiorito, he was a Knight of Calatrava and the current ambassador of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies to Venice (I-Rvat,
AS, NV, N. 192, f. 209 et al.).

35 A portrait of Scalzi, who had appeared in Rome and London, in this role by Charles Joseph Flipart is dated 1738.

456 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

which flowed under a bridge on the stage. The first act concluded with a ballo for the principal tributaries,

which paid homage to the Moghul empress. The scenes of Act Two took place in the palace, in which

Chinese furniture was seen. This act ended with a ballo in the grand avenue outside, where fountains

sprang from a golden vineyard. Act Three included two scenes which represented the temple of Amida.
A No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 730; Groppo 734; Wiel 368; Alm 895

1737/9 Demofoonte* Music by Gaetano Latilla*
[DEMoPHON]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1737-12-26
Va) Without dedicatee
co@) This second drama, which had been set as 1734/9 by Schiassi, opened on 26 December 1737 (A),

when it produced universal satisfaction.>' The title-page is dated 1738. Judging from the rapidity

with which it was succeeded by a revival, Demofoonte can not have been well received. Francesco Tolve

sang in the title role, with Carlo Scalzi (Timante), Rosa Pasquali (Dircea), and Costanza Celli (Creusa).
A No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 732; Groppo 736; Wiel 378; Alm 897

1737/10 L'oracolo in Messenia Music by Antonio Vivaldi?
[THE ORACLE IN MESSENIA]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
M1 Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1737-12-28
& Without dedicatee

OGL This resetting of Zeno's Merope (1712/1) had most recently been treated by Giacomelli for San Giovanni
Grisostomo as 1734/5. The new production opened on 28 December 1737. It was reported to have
met with maximum applause (A) and much appreciation (molto aggradimento).*" The title-page
is dated 1738; a license to print the libretto is dated 27 December 1737. The cast included Giuseppe
Rossi (Polifonte) and Anna Gird (Merope). L oracolo was revived with minor revisions at the Karntnertor
Theater, Vienna, during Carnival 1742.

3 Latilla (1711-88), born in Bari and trained in Naples, was making his debut as a composer of opera seria. He thereafter enjoyed the patronage
of Romans and Britons and toured extensively, returning to Venice in the 1740s as a popular composer of opere buffe. He served as maestro
di coro of the Pieta in Venice from 1753 to 1766.

3' The date is confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3187, p. 11.

38 Vivaldi was to have been in Ferrara to produce an opera at the Teatro Bonacossi, but his plans were disrupted by the papal legate, Cardinal
Ruffo, who prohibiting Vivaldi from entering the city because of his friendship with Anna Gird. The edict was acknowledged by Vivaldi
on 16 November. Vivaldi protested when his benefactor Bentivoglio subsequently suggested the production should take place without him.
He wrote on the 25th, I never play in the orchestra, except on the opening night, because it would be beneath my dignity to work as an
instrumentalist. I no longer stay in the same house with the Giro [sisters]...in fact for my house in Venice I pay 200 ducats.... (Io mai suono
in orchestra, salvo che la prima sera, perche non degno di far il mestiere del suonatore....In casa con le Gird io non sto mai...in Venezia una
e la casa mia, che paga 200 ducati..., Heller, Cronologia, pp. 62f).

3 Giacomelli's Merope was in turn a remake of Gasparini's of 1712. The libretto retains Zeno's original introduction of that year.

3! Diario ordinario, No. 3190, p. 10; Mancini et al. (Teatri, i/2, 39) give 30 December as the opening date. Antonio Vinciguerra, the count
of Collalto, was a leading patron of the Karntnertor theater in Vienna, where this work was mounted in 1742. The Viennese theaters had been
closed throughout the 1740-41 season in observance of the death of the emperor Charles VI (20 October 1740). Talbot speculates in Vivaldi
(Master Musicians, 3rd edn., p. 169) that the composer's trip to Vienna in 1741 may have been motivated by a plan (necessarily aborted) to
produce L'oracolo during that season. Vivaldi's final lodgings were in the K4rntnerstrasse, near the theater. In June 1741, a month before
his death (on 27 July), Vivaldi sold several concertos to the count.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 457

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 734; Groppo 738; Wiel 383; Alm 899; RV 726

1738/1 L' Alessandro nell'Indie Music by Johann Adolf Hasse
[ALEXANDER IN INDIA]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Michel Angiolo Boccardi
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1738-01-15
& Dedicated to Lucrezia Pignatelli, Princess of Strongoli*TM"'
oo This revival of Hasse's work, which had had its premiere in Dresden in 1731 and was produced in Venice

as 1736/1, opened as a third drama on 15 January 1738 (A, NV),!? when it received maximum
applause (sommo applauso). The cast included Francesco Tolve (Alessandro), Carlo Scalzi (Poro),
Rosa Pasquali (Erisena'*), and Costanza Celli (Cleofide).
A Scores (1738 et al.) in B-Bc; D-HAmi, Rtt (inst. only); F-Pc (inc.); GB-CDp; arias in I-Vnm;>"* sinfonia
in D-RH
Listed as Bonlini 733; Groppo 737; Wiel 380; Alm 898

1738/2 Rosmira Music attributed to Antonio Vivaldi et al.>!
[ROSMIRA]
A dramma per musica Text by Silvio Stampiglia
rT Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1738-01-27
a Dedicated to Friedrich [Wilhelm], Margrave of Brandenburg?!*
oO The text, which paid homage to the founding of Naples, was essentially the same as that for Partenope

(1707/4) and Rosmira fedele (1725/3). As a third drama, the work opened either on 27 January 1738,
when it was said to have received grand applause (A), or on the 28th, when the common applause
of the listeners was noted (NV).*! The dedication, signed by Vivaldi, was dated the 27th.

Ov Anna Giro sang in the title role, with Dorotea Lolli (Partenope), Margherita Giacomazzi (Arsace), and
Catterina Bassi (Ersilla). The work opened with a ritual dance in the temple of Apollo. A confidential
report of the 23rd noted that there would be a battle scene in which one officer would wear the livery
of the papal legate.>!* This may have referred to the duel in an ancient amphitheater, which took place
in the final scene. Rosmira was also produced in Klagenfurt during Carnival in 1738. Anna Giro again
took the title role, with Dorotea Lolli as Arsakes, in a revised version given in Graz in the autumn of

3" This Neapolitan princess (1704-60) had married Ferdinando Pignatelli in 1719. After her father's death (1728), his lands had passed to
his son-in-law. Given as Struognoli in the libretto.

3! Reported also in the Diario ordinario, No. 3196, p. 8. Metastasio's text had been set by Pescetti in 1732.
3 Spelled variously in Italian libretti as Erisena and Erissena (a name which is Lithuanian in derivation) as opposed to the more usual Erismena.

3!4 The eight arias in I-Vnm were newly composed for this production (Strohm, Opernarien, ii, 178). One aria set by Frederick the Great (facs.
with edn. by W. Goldhan [Wiesbaden, 1991]) may have been acquired from this production.

35 The title-page of the manuscript names Handel, Hasse, Michelli, Mazzoni, Paganelli, Pampani, and Pergolesi as contributing composers,
and to this list Strohm (Opernarien, ii, 282) adds Vinci. Elsewhere (Vivaldi's Career, p. 60) Strohm says that one aria was from Handel's
Ezio (HWV 29) of 1732.

3'6 The Venetian singer Giacomo Zaghini, who took many minor roles in productions at Sant' Angelo, was in the service of Sophie Dorothea,
the wife (from 1706) of Frederick I of Prussia (1688-1740). This offers one possible explanation for Vivaldi's apparent acquaintance with
the dedicatee, but there are several others. The margrave and his wife were both accomplished musicians.

317 In this case the legate's reports seem to be based in part on the avvisi, Thus more credence can probably be given to the earlier date and
estimation of the work. However, the later date is given (apparently from a common source) in the Diario ordinario, No. 3202, p. 7.

318 T-Vas, IS, RC, Busta 559/2, entry of 23 January 1737 M.V. Note the missing livery of an attendant of the papal legate in 1737/1.

458 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1739. The remaining members of that cast were Marianna Pircher (Partenope), Giuseppe Alberti
(Armindo), and Margarita Flora (Emilio).

A Score in I-Tn?!?
Listed as Bonlini 735; Groppo 739; Wiel 384; Alm 900; RV 731

1738/3 Gianguir Music by Antonio Giai
[JAHANGHIR]
A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno
M1 Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1738-02-08
& Dedicated to Marquis Cesare Bevilacqua*'

OO Zeno's text, first set for San Cassiano by Giacomelli as 1728/10, survived through 1759, when Ciampi's
setting was staged at San Benedetto. Now given as a fourth drama and described as an opera of good
taste, Gianguir opened on 8 February 1738 (A), when it garnered full applause (NV). Francesco
Tolve sang in the title role, with Carlo Scalzi (Cosrovio) and Rosa Pasquali (Zama).

fi Arias in I-Vnm, Vqs
Listed as Bonlini 736; Groppo 740; Wiel 379; Alm 901

1738/4 Armida al campo d'Egitto Music attributed to Antonio Vivaldi
[ARMIDE AT THE EGYPTIAN CAMP]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Palazzi
MM Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With intermezzi and balli SORTING DATE: 1738-02-12
@ Dedicated to August Brandofer**

@E This revival of 1718/7, now offered as Sant'Angelo's fourth drama, opened on 12 February 1738
(A) with the perfunctory comment that it elicited applause (NV). The cast included Giuseppe Rossi
(Califfo), Anna Gird (Armida), and Dorotea Lolli (Erminia). The ballerino Pietro Sodi was cited in
a complaint by Vivaldi for misdemeanors during the last days of Carnival. He had left the theater after
the first act of the performance on 16 February with the excuse that he was injured, but he then had
gone to San Giovanni Grisostomo with friends. On the 17th he left his pas de deux at home, causing
total commotion and scandal. Vivaldi proposed not to pay him for these performances.*

A Score (1719/7) and miscellaneous movements in I-Tn*

Listed as Bonlini 737; Groppo 741; Wiel 382; Alm 902; RV 699d

3!9 With a sinfonia by G. Micheli.

320 Giai was the maestro di cappella at the court in Turin.
! The libretto suggests that Bevilacqua's marriage to Elisabetta Pepoli was recent.

32 The date and epithet are echoed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3210, p. 5.

33 Strohm (Opernarien, ii, 268) notes two arias were from Leo's Farnace; two more must be considered anonymous.

324 Addressed as a Monsieur from Augsburg. Brandofer's presence in Venice in 1738 may have played a role in the publication that year
of instrumental works by Alessandro Marcello in Augsburg (see Selfridge-Field, Marcello, pp. 391 f), for travelers from Augsburg were otherwise
few. Brandhofer was a more usual spelling.

325 The date is confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3210, p. 5.

36 Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, 39, citing a letter from Vivaldi dated 19 Februaris 1737 in I-Vas, Sezione Notarile, Atti Pietro Zuccoli, Busta
14319, f. 56.

7 Pancino (Le opere, ii) gives particulars about the sources for this work.

1738/5

A

 1738a
 1738b
 1738
 1738d
 1738e

1738/6

i

a
CO ao

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 459

Angelica Music by Giovanni Battista Lampugnani
[ANGELICA]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Carlo Vedova
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1738-05-11

Dedicated to Francesco III d'Este, Duke of Modena*

This account of the love of Angelica (Anna Mazzoni) and Medoro (Giovanni Tedeschi) was written
by a librettist who considered himself to be an accidental poet with no previous experience. He was
given eight days, he claimed, to write the text. His objective was to give natural and clear expression,
which was said to have been derived from the tragedy Anglica e Medoro by Mons. Dolfin.* Angelica
was first performed on 11 May 1738 (A), the Sunday before Ascension, with full applause (NV).*
Its purpose was to entertain the numerous foreign nobles here (A).*! The dedicatee and two princesses
of Modena arrived on the 14th (NV).

Aria in I-Bc

Listed as Bonlini 738; Groppo 742; Wiel 385; Alm 903

Serenata for the name-day of Louis XV of France. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
Partenope in Adria. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Serenata for the public entry of the French ambassador. Cf. Suppl. Sa.
Gli amori fortunati d'Ormindo. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Telemacco nell'isola di Calipso. Cf. Suppl. Sa.

L'Olimpiade Music adapted from Giovanni Battista Pergolesi
[THE OLYMPIAD] by Johann Adolf Hasse
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1738-11-22

Dedicated to Giuseppe de Baeza**

This setting was first performed in the sumptuous theater of San Giovanni Grisostomo on 22 November
1738 with considerable applause (A).*? The cast included Faustina Bordoni (Aristea) in her next-to-last
season in Venice and Antonio Barbieri (Clistene) in his final production. The staging, undoubtedly
more lavish than that for Sant' Angelo, featured grand vistas of the countryside, moved to a site near
the Olympic games, and featured the temple of Jupiter, where the winning athletes were crowned.
Metastasio's text had been set by Vivaldi and staged at Sant' Angelo (1734/4) under Lalli's direction.
The work was now produced under Goldoni's administration.** Hasse later (1756) reset the entire text
for Dresden.

8 The duke of Modena, Francesco III (1698-1780) added the title of duke of Reggio (Emilia) to his name in 1737.
3 Groppo MS, p. 248.

3 The date is confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3248, p. 9.

33! Trebbi's avviso of 17 maggio 1738 also says that these nobles were predominantly Neapolitan. The paraphrase in the Diario ordinario
(Joc. cit.) stated that most foreigners attending this year's fair were Neapolitans.

3 The prince of Castromonte was the designated special ambassador from the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, which may account for the presentation

of Pergolesi's music.

333 The date is confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3332, p. 2. In NV is was received with mere applause.

354 See Ortolani, TO, x, 1242.

460 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

A Arias (added by Hasse): A-Wgm, Wn; B-Bc, Br; D-B, DIb, HAmi, Lem; F-Pc; Gb-Lbl; I-Mc, Tn, Vqs;
US-Bp
Listed as Bonlini 739; Groppo 743; Wiel 377; Alm 904

1738/7 Argenide Music adapted from Baldassare Galuppi by Pietro Chiarini**
[ARGENIDE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Alvise or Girolamo Giusti***
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With intermezzi SORTING DATE: 1738-11-29
a Without dedicatee
do The text purported to treat the life of Idomeneos but was drenched in fabricated subplots. It had first

been set by Galuppi as 1733/1. The production opened on 29 November 1738 (A, NV).* The cast,
which was entirely changed, now featured Maddalena Mollarini (Argenide) and Lorenzo Moretti
(Idomeneo).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 740; Groppo 744; Wiel 381; Alm 905

1738/8 Alessandro Severo" Music usually attributed to Andrea Bernasconi**
[ALEXANDER SEVERUS]
A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno
i Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1738-12-27
& Dedicated to Francis Stephen, Duke of Lorraine*

R This second opera opened on 27 December 1738. It was still running on 17 January 1739 (NV). The
title-page bears two dates  1739 and 1738. The duke and his wife, the archduchess of Austria, arrived
on 29 December but were immediately placed in quarantine. Despite an appeal to the Senate, their
confinement lasted for four weeks.* Angelo Maria Monticelli sang in the title role. Faustina Bordoni
appeared as Julia, the emperor's mother. Zeno's libretto, first set by Lotti as 1717/2, had been adapted
in numerous subsequent works. Another version of the current work was given in Venice under the
title Salustia in 1753.

A Arias in GB-LbI (attrib. Bernasconi); I-Vqs (attrib. Porpora); US-FAy (attrib. Bernasconi)
Listed as Bonlini 741; Groppo 745; Wiel 388; Alm 906

 1738f I pastor fido in musica. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

3% Chiarini (c. 1717-65), who was from Brescia, set just a few works for Sant' Angelo and one (Goldoni's Statira, 1741/3) for San Giovanni
Grisostomo. Wiel (Teatri, p. 128) credited Galuppi with the score. Groppo (MS, p. 248) said that the majority of the arias were selected by
the singers. Wiesend (Rappporti, p. 252) says that most of the arias were taken from the 1733 version and that Galuppi had no active role
in this production.

36 Girolamo Giusti, according to Wiel, and Alvise Giusti according to Groppo. Piero Weiss (Commedia dell' Arte Operas' ) attributes the
work to Chiarini.

33 The date is also confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3334, p.4.

338 Wiel (Teatri, p. 130) attributes the work to Porpora. Bernasconi (1706-84), possibly born in Marseilles, was active in Milan prior to his
appointment as maestro di cappella at the Ospedale della Pieta (1744-53). He was subsequently employed at the Bavarian court, Munich,
where he served as music tutor to the princesses Maria Anna Josepha and Josepha Maria. In 1755 he was named Kapellmeister.

* En route to Venice, various members of the House of Lorraine had started a period of quarantine during the week ending 22 November
1738 (I-Rvat, AS, NV, N. 191, f. 589).

5 Avvisi of 3 Gennaro 1738 [M.V.] (Sidoni) and 24 Gennaro 1738 M.V. (Donado).

1739/1

mM

1739/2

Op,

A

 1739a
1739/3

mM

ra


OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 461

Achille in Sciro Music by Pietro Chiarini
[ACHILLES ON SCYROS]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Larinda e Vanessio;*' Lucilla e Pandolfo; SORTING DATE: 1739-01-10

Serpilla e Bacocco
Dedicated to Michel Bernardo, N. V.
Achilles, who was to become the hero of the Trojan War and a central figure in Homer's liad, was
hidden by his mother on the island of Scyros to enable him to avoid the war. There, while he was
disguised as a girl, he fell in love with Deidamia, the king's daughter. This second opera was first
performed on 10 January 1739 (A, NV). Francesca Poli was cast as Achille, with Maddalena Mollarini
as Deidamia. Metastasio's text had first been given in Caldara's setting at the court theater in Vienna
in 1736. Legrenzi's setting of Bentivoglio's text of the same title had been staged in Ferrara (1663)
and Venice (1664; cd. Suppl. 2a).
Aria in GB-Lbl
Listed as Bonlini 745; Groppo 749; Wiel 390; Alm 911

Viriate Music by Johann Adolf Hasse
[VIRIATE]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Domenico Lalli
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1739-01-24

Dedicated to Friedrich Christian, Electoral Prince of Saxony*?

Metastasio's text had been set by Porpora, under the title Siface, as 1725/8. As Viriate, it was first
performed on 24 January 1739 (A), when it drew a large audience both for the quality of the music
and for the good taste of the scenes. Faustina Bordoni took the title role, with Angelo Montivelli (Siface),
Gregorio Babbi (Orcano) and Giovanna Babbi (/smene).

Score in I-MC; arias in US-FAy

Listed as Bonlini 744; Groppo 748; Wiel 387; Alm 910

La fama dell'onore. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Creusa Music by Pietro Leone Cardena*?
{CREUSA]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Urbano Rizzi
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1739-05-06

Dedicated to Giuseppe Maria de' Medici

In early Greek mythology Creusa, the queen of Athens, was the wife of Xouthos, prince of Thessaly.
In this account their son Ion has had his name changed to Gelone, and a sister, Phylene/Filene, has been

*' Listed as Un bottegaro gentilhuomo by Groppo (MS, p. 250), who cites all three works. Wiel cites only the first and second. Piperno (Note,
p. 286) says that only the first was given with Achille and that the second was given (atypically) at San Gio. Grisostomo with Viriate (1739/2).
(The unwillingness of San Giovanni Grisostomo to present intermezzi allowed Hasse to offer them to Sant' Angelo.)

3 This was the first in a series of works to be presented for the young Saxon prince. He was en route home from Naples, where his sister,
Maria Amalia, the new wife of Don Carlos Borbone (the king of the Two Sicilies), had been installed as queen.

38 The libretto indicates that Cardena was from Palermo.

34 A text by Rizzi had last been set for performance in Venice in 1707.

462

A

 1739b
 1739

1739/4

OO

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

introduced.** The cast included Giovanni Astrua (Creusa) and Andrea Masn6 (Xuto). Creusa opened
on 6 May 1739 (A, NV).* The Ascension fair closed on the 21st but the opera continued until the 24th.

No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 746; Groppo 750; Wiel 391; Alm 912

Il merito al soglio. Cf. Suppl. 7.

Il pastor fido ridicolo. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Feraspe Music by Antonio Vivaldi
[PHERASPES]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Francesco Silvani by Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1739-11-07

Dedicated to Marquis Ferdinando Monti*4

Ancient Persian lines of succession were confused by the fact that Darius had had two wives  Stateira
and Roxane. He had one son by each. Upon his death, his lands were to be divided between them. This
account emphasized the efforts of Pheraspes, his son by his first marriage, to reconsolidate the empire.
Vivaldi's last opera opened on 7 November 1739 (PV).** The performances were well attended and
the singers merited applause, according to Pallade Veneta. The Neapolitan Andrea Masno sang in
the title role, with Catterina Fumagalli (Statira), Elena Venier (Rosane), and Giacomo Zaghini (Astiage).
Writing from Rome in the same year, the French statesman Charles de Brosses paraphrased Tartini's
observation on the very different receptions of Vivaldi's operas and his instrumental works by saying,
Vivaldi...has been hissed for the first and praised for the [second].*

Because they were not paid promptly, the singers brought suit against Vivaldi in ensuing months.
This financial reversal may have contributed to Vivaldi's ill-fated departure from Venice. His name
had disappeared from the roster of the Pieta the preceding April, following a sharp dispute with his
brother-in-law, the scenographer Antonio Mauro, over a cancelled Carnival production in Ferrara the
preceding winter.**! In August 1739 Vivaldi had been succeeded as maestro di coro at the Pieta by the
Neapolitan Gennaro d' Alessandro. However, the Florentine marquis Albizzi wrote to Vivaldi twice
in November 1739 regarding dancers whom he was sending to Venice for the coming Carnival at
Sant' Angelo.** This suggests that Vivaldi's departure from Venice was arranged on short notice.
No musical sources known

Listed as Bonlini 748; Groppo 751; Wiel 389; Alm 913; RV 713

350

+5 The text was said to be derived from Euripides, who promoted the idea that Apollo was Ion's father.

6 The date is confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3399, p. 7.

> Thus far unidentified. The surname Monti was associated with Brescia, Parma, Siena, Bologna, and other Italian locales, but the name may
also be corrupted from that of a Frenchman in the company of Charles de Brosses.

+48 Feraspe was already in rehearsal by 24 September (Diario ordinario, No. 3471, p. 5). Vivaldi was identified in the libretto as the maestro
di cappella to the duke of Lorraine. Prince Charles of Lorraine, who was Vivaldi's intended patron on his forthcoming trip to Vienna, had
left the Venetian Republic with his parents, the Grand Duke and Duchess of Tuscany, the preceding January. The group passed through Verona
on their way to Austria on the 12th (GB-Lpro, SPV, Ser. 99, Box 63, f. 378, report of Neil Brown for 16 January 1738/9).

+ Heller, Cronologia, p. 67.

35 Vio, Departure, pp. 90-96. See also the account of Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, pp. 39f (where the opening date is given as 9 November).

35! See 1737/8.

3 Heller, Cronologia, p. 69.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1730-39) 463

1739/5 Farnace Music by Rinaldo di Capua?
[PHARNAKES]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Antonio Maria Lucchini by Carlo Goldoni
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1739-11-21
& Dedicated to Fernando de Baeza, a Spanish Grandee*TM*

 <> 2 Apart from the elimination of one role, Goldoni's revisions to the text set by Vivaldi as 1727/3 seem
to have been few. Farnace opened on 21 November 1739 (A),> when it was received with great...satis-
faction and applause.** Giovanni Tedeschi sang in the title role, with Anna Maria Bagnolese Pinacci
(Berenice) and Giustina Gallo (Tamiri). The text remained in use until the 1780s. One ofits late settings
was that of Sarti for San Samuele (1776). A great pyramid, intended to be the final resting place of
the king of Pontos, was seen in Acts One and Two.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Bonlini 747; Groppo 752; Wiel 386; Alm 914

1739/6 Ottone" Music by Gennaro d'Alessandro**'
[OTHO]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Antonio Salvi
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli; combattimento SORTING DATE: 1739-12-26
va) Without dedicatee
 This simplified account of the story used in 1682/8 opened on 26 December 1739, when it was found

to be very pleasing.>** The Saxon prince Friedrich Christian wrote of the premiere that he found the
music very good and the musicians very bad, as much for their acting as for their singing. The scenes
are beautiful and the balls done perfectly. St. George [Andre San Giorgio], le Sauterra, and the little
Zanettina danced marvelously. The cast included Giovanni Tedeschi (Ottone), Antonio Raaff*
(Berengario), Anna Maria Bagnolese Pinacci (Matilde), and Giustina Gallo (Adelaide). The count of
Wackerbarth [the prince's minister] was more impressed with the trappings of the theater  its loges,
the tapestries and furnishings of its boxes, and its refreshments  than with the performance. For him
the opera was mediocre but the balli were excellent. Apparently the significance of the Saxon
virtue extolled in the story was lost on these visitors. The work was apparently still running on 9 January
1740 (A), when the elector of Saxony again attended.**'
A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 753; Wiel 395; Alm 915

353 The Neapolitan di Capua (c. 1705-85) was active chiefly in Rome.

3 Perhaps related to Don Giuseppe (Jose) de Baeza, the marquis of Castromonte, who was to make his long deferred public entry as ambassador
of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies on 25 January 1740 (NV).

355 The date is confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3486, p. 12.
356 Pallade Veneta, p. 311.

357 D' Alessandro, a Neapolitan, had recently become the maestro di cappella of the Pieta. His presence in Venice is confirmed by the fact
that on 19 December 1739 Antonio Raaff sent music by him to Padre Martini in Bologna. See Schnoebelen, Letters, Item 4239.

358 Pallade Veneta, p. 312. The date is confirmed in the Diario ordinario, No. 3499, p. 2. The title-page is dated 1740.

3 Antonio/Anton Raaff (1714-97), after an active career in many cities of Italy, Germany, and Austria, made his final appearance in Mozart's
Idomeneo (Munich, 1781).

36 Witkowska, Federico Cristiano, p. 311. The dancers were directed by Monsieur Soutter, and the work had a direttore del combattimento
(Santo Lanzerotti), but the individual dancers are not named in the libretto. La Sauterra is presumably the choreographer's wife; Zanettina
cannot be identified.

36! The electoral prince had arrived in Venice on c. 20 December (multiple dates are recorded in primary sources).

464

1739/7

1

8

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Candaspe, regina de' sciti Music by Giovanni Battista Casali
[CANDASPE, QUEEN OF THE SCYTHIANS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1739-12-30

Dedicated to Friedrich Christian, Electoral Prince of Saxony

Many prisoners were taken during a battle between Scythia and Constantinople. Various amorous
fantasies developed between the natives and the prisoners. Candaspe (Catterina Fumagalli), the queen
ofthe Scythians, was quite taken with the young, handsome Learchos (Rosa Gabrielli). Their intentions
were thwarted when two generals returned home with more prisoners, including Ergonda (Elena Venier),
the wife of Learchos, and Gusman (Francesco Amorevoli), her father. The new impresario at Sant' Angelo
was Giovanni Felice Dini.

Candaspe opened on 30 December 1739, when the performance was attended by the dedicatee. Some
copies of the libretto have a printer's date of 1739 and a dedication to Frederick Christian, while others
have a printer's date of 1740 and no dedication.* The prince's minister, the count of Wackerbarth,
found both the libretto and the music to be bad but the dance numbers passable.>

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 754; Wiel 398; Alm 916, 917

3 The Roman Casali (1715-92) was chiefly active as a church musician at San Giovanni Laterano.
36} Compare Sartori 4628 and 4629.

364 Witkowska, Federico Cristiano,, p. 312.

The 1740s: An Overview

he 1740s brought to Venetian theaters changes
Sie affected the most fundamental aspects of
their activities. The relationship between comedy

and opera was radically and permanently altered. The
number of houses functioning and the modes in which they
operated were redefined. Old age and emigration depleted
the roster of personnel. This reversed the trend of earlier
decades, when Venice had been a magnet to aspiring singers
and composers. Venetian musicians gravitated to lands were
no Italian was spoken  from the British Isles to the
growing cities in Poland, Russia, and Scandinavia. Yet the
decade is difficult to characterize in a few words. This was
nota time for reflection. It was a decade of frenzied activity.

The doge Pietro Grimani (1741-52) was an erudite
former ambassador to Vienna and London, where he was
an honorary member of the Royal Academy. Though a friend
of Goldoni, he was not well-liked by ordinary Venetians.
As he confronted a series of continuing wars to the east,
Venice endured the constant threat of devastating contagions.
Its economic fortunes continued to decline. In 1740 and
again in 1745 the Council of Ten issued sternly worded
edicts on masking. The suppression of gambling (1744) was
a corollary measure.

Entering into the polyphony of comedy and opera were
the voices of individual theaters. While Sant' Angelo and
San Giovanni Grisostomo  the most steadfast supporters
of serious opera  continued to stage drammi per musica
into the later 1740s, comedy took the upper hand at both.
The reasons diverged. San Giovanni Grisostomo was forced,
by a fire at San Samuele on the last night of September 1747,
to host its displaced troupe until San Samuele reopened the
following spring. Its drammi per musica sputtered to quiet
death in 1751. Sant' Angelo made a wholesale conversion
to prose comedy in 1748.

The newly refurbished San Samuele proved to be a
versatile house that offered the opulence (one could say
ostentation) for which San Giovanni had long been known.
These details cannot be represented accurately in Figure 27,
but they give some sense of the changing fortunes of the
1740s in relation to the preceding decade. (The story is
continued in Figures 28 and 29.)

The most turbulent, but perhaps also the most innova-
tive, theater was San Moise. When Latilla's La finta camer-
iera, which was the first Neapolitan-style comic work given
in Venice, was performed there in 1743, it transformed the
theatrical landscape overnight. Theater-goers, accustomed
to Bolognese musical farce and Venetian quasi-musical prose
comedy and satires, were entranced by the acting, rather than
the singing or drama, in Latilla's work and others like it.
Within a year the opera bernesca (or dramma giocoso per
musica) was supplanting the long sacrosanct dramma per
musica.

Opera buffa (used here to designate varied species of
comedies set to music) brought with it changing conventions
of performance and theatrical management. Opere buffe were
initially performed by resident troupes led by a capo comico.
Theaters which hosted both drammi per musica and opere
buffe faced the problem of resolving conflicts between opera
impresari, who were usually engaged for several years at
atime, and troupes, which could be itinerant. Like spoken
comedies, opere buffe were inclined to run for shorter
periods and to be changed more often. Their lengths were
highly variable. The intermezzi given with opera productions
became more substantial. The transition is clearly evident
at Sant'Angelo in 1746-47, where intermezzi were newly
devised for three or four singers. San Moise was quick to
follow suit.

In addition to becoming a staple of the Ascension fair,
comic opera penetrated the earlier part of the autumn season.
However, the spring season came under stringent government
scrutiny by the end of the decade. In 1749, an Ascension
opera season was authorized by a one-vote majority. By
this time, spoken plays were also increasingly valued. Their
production was an attractive financial alternative to opera,
for the costs of a troupe were modest compared to those of
celebrated singers and ballet troupes.

Venice was not left wholly without drammi per musica,
but appreciative audiences for them were dwindling. The
diminution is reflected in the fact that reports of Venetian
opera disappeared from most weekly news reports by the
1745-46 season, although a few still mentioned selected
theatrical works through 1752. Apparently, riportisti did not

466

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

35+

3047)

Sant'Angelo
@ San Cassiano

2047]

@ San Gio. Grisostomo
@San Moise

1547]

@ San Salvatore
@ San Samuele

Other _

1745
FIGURE 27. Productions by theater, 1730s vs. 1740s.

attach much significance to comic opera. The appearance
of Groppo's catalogue in 1745 was coincident with the
collapse of serious opera. The catalogue appealed to
collectors of libretti and other artifacts of opera, that is to
the remaining defenders of the dramma per musica. Yet the
de facto arbitrator of the genre wars was Carlo Goldoni, who
expressed ambivalence about the setting of his comedies to
music. (They thrived either way.)

Surviving manuscripts sources demonstrate renewed
interest in the phenomenon of opera, however altered it might
be. Some represent productions given far from Venice,
though aria collections testify to the enthusiasm of students
and amateurs in imitating what they saw and heard on the
stage. While the percentage of all Venetian productions
which were revivals increased, music itself was more nearly
ubiquitous in public and private life than it had ever been.

The 1740s: Chronology

Music by Johann Adolf Hasse

Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Bartolomeo Vitturi

SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
SORTING DATE: 1740-01-27

1740/1 Cleonice
[CLEONIKE]
A dramma per musica
im Performed at Sant' Angelo
Without incidental items
& Dedicated to Friedrich Christian, Electoral Prince of Saxony


This revival of the work sometimes called Demetrio opened on 27 January 1740 (PV). It had been given
previously as 1732/3 and 1737/2. The dedicatee, who had arrived in Venice on 21 December 1739 (NV),|

said of the premiere that he could ask only for more music. The fact that Hasse was his court composer

undoubtedly colored his opinion. The prince's presence inspired an unusually obsequious dedication

by Vitturi.

The Saxon minister, August Joseph Ludwig of Wackerbarth, wrote that it was the best work of the season,
despite the mediocrity of the voices, and noted that he was enclosing some examples of it. He said
that the balli and decorations were nothing special but that the composition of the music was generally

' Alm, Catalog, p. 588, reports the 19th.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 467

approved. Cleonice is also likely to be the work which Lady Mary Wortley Montagu reported on 15
February to have heard from the prince's box, but she had no comment on the performance. Another
observer, Johann Casper von Goethe, wrote on 16 February 1741 that Cleonice was not as good as
Adriano in Siria (1740/2). Attendance was low, he said, and that the theater was littered with filth. The
leading lady, Signora [Catterina] Fumagalli, sang louder but no less beautifully than all the others.
On a second visit, Goethe found the music, staging, costumes, performance, and the theater itself all
to have been glorious (herrlich).

A Scores [as Demetrio] in B-Bc (Dresden, 1740); D-DIb (Dresden, 1740); F-Pc (Dresden, 17407); I-Vnm

(Venice, 1732); arias in D-Dlb (Dresden, 1740); US-BEm, CAi, Cn; I-Vc, Vnm

Listed as Groppo 755; Wiel 399; Alm 918, 919

 1740a Serenata in honor of Friedrich Christian, Prince of Saxony. Cf. Suppl. 5a.
1740/2 Adriano in Siria Music by Antonio Giai
[HADRIAN IN SYRIA]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1740-02-06
& Dedicated to Antonio Giorgio Clerici*
Ie) Metastasio's text, which remained popular through the end of the century, had first been set for Venice

by Giacomelli as 1733/2. This setting had its premiere on 6 February 1740 (A), when it was noted for
its sweet poetry and music (PV). Friedrich Christian, who attended the premiere, found that the music
was good enough and somewhat better than that of the preceding work at San Giovanni Grisostomo
[Ottone, 1739/6] but that the dances were less good.

For the last night of Carnival (1 March), a special box (in the form of a cabinet) was arranged for
the prince. It was framed by five other boxes which were covered in brocades and damask. They glittered
in the reflected candlelight. The performance, which began at 22:00 O.V., included the very best singers,
drawn from many remote places by a generous stipend, and a highly selected orchestra of the most
accomplished players of various instruments. The performance ended at 3:00 O.V., after which a great
banquet was given in honor of His Royal Highness. The entire stage was turned into a most beautiful
machine, illuminated by many candles...and the ballo began.*

Another account (NV) notes that the theater was illuminated by 160 torches and five great crystal
chandeliers holding 300 candles. It claims that the royal dinner began after the first act of the opera

? Witkowska, Federico Cristiano, p.313. The Wackerbarth family were from Rome. The count had been inducted into the Order of St. Januarius,
founded by Charles VII, the king of the Two Sicilies, in 1738.

3 The stay of the poet's father, J. C. von Goethe, is documented in his Reise durch Italien im Jahre 1740 (original preserved in D-WRgsa).
The other members of the cast were Elena Venier (Barsene), Rosa Gabrielli (Demetrio), Andrea Masno (Fenicio), Angela Massi (Olinto),
and Francesco Amorevoli (Mitrane), loc. cit., p. 25.

 Giai was maestro di cappella to the king of Sardinia.
5 A Spanish grandee.
6. soavissima poesia e musica.

? Witkowska, Federico Cristiano, p. 312. Giuseppe Santarelli sang in the title role, with Antonio Raaff (Osroa), Anna Bagnolese Pinacci
(Sabina), and Giustina Gallo (Emirena). Monsieur Souter was the choreographer.

8 Adria festosa, p. 28 (...rappresentato da' musici pit eccellenti, che da ogni rimota parte si chiamano con generoso stipendio e con una
scieltissima orchestra de' pit perfetti suonatori di vari stromenti). As explained in Song and Season, Ch. 3, the times quoted would have been
relative to sunset. The hours recorded in Adria festosa are contradicted elsewhere. For example, in Benigna's entry of | Marzo 1740 in his
Memorie, he writes, Si fece l'opera a S. Gio Grisostomo ad un hora di notte, con una Cena Reale e doppo la gran festa di ballo con illuminatione
sino giorno. The prince of Saxony, in his own account, reports arriving at the theater at seven in the evening for the opera and remaining
there through the banquet and the ball until six and a half hours of the morning (Witkowska, Federico Cristiano, p. 314). This reflects
German timekeeping, which is evident also in Goethe's Reise, which relates that an ordinary performance of the same work in mid-February
lasted from 8 to 11. On various systems of recification, including Goethe's, see Song and Season, Table 5.3.

468

A

 1740b
1740/3

im

A

 1740c
 1740d
 1740e
 1740f
 1740g
 1740h
 1740i

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

and was hosted by the four Venetian nobles  Giulio Contarini, Alvise Mocenigo, Andrea Querini,
and Pietro Correr  who were the official hosts of the electoral prince of Saxony. The festa di ballo
was attended by all the most important [noble] women of the area, covered in gems and fine dresses,
and lasted until daybreak.'

Score in D-Dlb

Listed as Groppo 756; Wiel 396; Alm 920

Il decreto del fato. Cf. Suppl. Sa.

Tullo Ostilio Music by Giovanni Battista Pescetti
[TULLIus HOSTILIus]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Adriano Morselli by Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1740-02-19

Dedicated to the Prince of Villa Franca'

Morselli's original text had been set as 1685/6 by M. A. Ziani. Under the title J tre difensori della patria,
Pescetti's own musical setting had been given here as 1729/8."' This production opened on 19 February
1740.'? Andrea Masn6, the apparent impresario, sang in the title role, with Caterina Fumagalli (Marzia),
Elena Venier (Curio), and Rosa Gabrielli (Sabina). Miscellaneous arias were chosen by the singers,"
who were in conflict with the management. The electoral prince Friedrich Christian attended but had
no quoted comment on the work.

No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 757; Wiel 401; Alm 921

Faraone. Cf. Suppl. 8.

La ninfa saggia. Cf. Suppl. 9.

Gli amanti felici. Cf. Suppl. 9.

Le quattro stagioni. Cf. Suppl. 9.

Il coro delle muse. Cf. Suppl. 9.

La concordia del Tempo colla Fama. Cf. Suppl. 9.

Le muse in gara. Cf. Suppl. 9.

 Diario ordinario, No. 3528 (report of 5 March [1740]), p. 8. The libretto for Adriano featured a magnificent salon for the ballo at the end

of Act Two.

' A Spanish grandee, probably Fadrique Vicente Alvarez de Toledo Osorio y Pimentel, marquis of Villa Franca, duke of Fernandina and Montalto,
and prince de Paternd (1686-1753). He was inducted into the Order of the Golden Fleece in 1750. Villa Franca, on the Ligurian coast, offered
apromontory from which Spanish and French troops routed both the Piedmontese and the English on the waters below in 1742. It was normally
a port-of-call for ships sailing between France and Sardinia. The dedication to this work was signed by Andrea Masno, who was the apparent

impresario.

"' Groppo MS, p. 253.

". Witkowska, Federico Cristiano, p. 312.
'? Groppo MS, p. 253.

'4 Cf. Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, 40.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 469

1740/4 Gustavo primo, re di Svezia Music by Baldassare Galuppi
[Gustav I, KING OF SWEDEN]
A dramma per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
MM Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1740-05-25
& Dedicated to Marquis Giovanni Giacomo Grimaldi'$

In Goldoni's first opera seria, Christian, the second king of Denmark, subjugated the Swedes and took
four hostages, including Gustav, the young son of his enemy, King Henry of Vasa. The people of Liibeck
liberated him from his Danish prison and he was eventually elected king of his people [1523]. The plot
treats a fictional episode in which the Swedish senator Ernest rescued Clotilde, the baby sister of Gustav,
who grew up disguised as Dorisbe, while Gustav was raised as Learchos.'

Oo Gustavo primo was first performed on 25 May 1740. The cast included Pompeo Basteris (Ernesto),
Maria Camati (Ergilda), Lorenzo Girardi (Learco), and Marianna Imer (Dorisbe).'* According to Goldoni,
the work was designed with the singers' merits in mind.'? In particular, he tried to make the roles of
the two donne relatively equal, perhaps because Marianna Imer (here the seconda donna) was the daughter
of his longtime colleague Giuseppe Imer. The work was produced in Modena and Este in 1754.

 Prince Friedrich Christian of Saxony attended the premiere but left no comment on the work.? Lady
Mary Wortley Montagu, who attended a performance on | June,! was similarly reticent. A contemporary
account relates that the drama itself was well received, but the skill and agility in dancing of Madame
Teresa Le Conte of Turin, which commanded the respect of everyone and elicited universal applause,
was much more distinguished.

A Score in D-DIb; arias in B-Bc; US-BEm
Listed as Groppo 758; Wiel 402; Alm 922

 1740j Il trionfo di Nettuno. Cf. Suppl. 8.
 1740k L' Adria in giubilo. Cf. Suppl. 7.

 17401 La fama. Cf. Suppl. 7.

 1740m La Galatea. Cf. Suppl. 7.

'S A nobleman of Genoa, the third son of Antonio Grimaldi (1661-1731) and Marie of Lorraine. Goldoni, who was married to the daughter
of a Genovese notary, was to spend the years 1741-43 as Genovese consul in Venice.

' Much of the plot (which seems to have been drafted before the end of 1738) is subjected to a fairly free political treatment. The historical
Gustavus Vasa (Gustavus I) was proclaimed king of Sweden in 1523, when it broke away from Denmark. In a sense Goldoni's text redresses
one by Silvani (La costanza in trionfo, 1696/10), in which the Swedes were the oppressors (as they had been earlier in the eighteenth century)
and the Danes the oppressed. The disposition of Swedish power was of interest in Poland (and thus ostensibly to the Saxon prince) because
of the Swedish wars of the early eighteenth century, during which most of the fighting took place in Poland.

'' Diario ordinario, No. 3563, pp. 8f.

'8 The latter two had worked in comedy troupes, where Girardi took the nickname Schiampetta (see Ortolani, TO, xii, 1167). The absence
of other opera productions during this Ascension season may owe to exhaustion from the visit of Friedrich Christian and the fact that May
(as computed by Benigna [Memorie, f. 71] ) was the eighth [consecutive] month of winter on account of the serious cold which prevailed
throughout the month.

'' Preface to Vol. XV of his collected works; see Ortolani, TO, i 757.
? Witkowska, Federico Cristiano, p. 316.
2! Halsband, Lady Mary Wortley Montague, p. 195.

 Fu gradito il dramma stesso, ma si distinse molto pitt la leggiadria, ed agilita nel ballo di Madama Teresa Leconte da Torrino, che si attrasse
lameraviglia d'ognuno e ne riporte universale l'applauso (L adria festosa, p. 95). Goldoni was partial to the Genovese and, although he generally
resented the expense of balli, he may have exempted this production, which was clearly pitched to please a patron from the Piedmont.

470

 1740n
 17400

1740/5
iM
&
@

Qe

1740/6

MM

&
Oo

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Osmano, re di Tunisia. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

La selva delli spropositi. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Zenobia Music by Guglielmo Sbacci
[ZENOBIA]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With Serpina e UbertoTM and balli SORTING DATE: 1740-11-12

Dedicated to Lodovico Vidiman [=Widman] and Quintilia Rezzonico

This was a pastoralized version of the ancient tale of the virtuous Armenian princess Zenobia, who
loved the Parthian prince Tiridates but was here commanded to secretly wed the prince Rhadamisthos.
Tiridates subsequently engaged in the battle which introduced the work. Zenobia opened on 12 November
1740.7

Although Cesare Gargante's flowery dedication of the libretto for Zenobia proclaimed it a famous drama
from a celebrated pen, it seems to have been upstaged by Pergolesi's intermedio, in which the final
duet by Vinci caused greatly applause. Domenico Cricchi, who greatly extended the reputation of
Pergolesi's work, was praised for both his acting and his singing.' Barbara Stabili sang in the title role,
with Laura Bambini (Tiridate) and Carlo Dardocci (Radamisto). Metastasio's text was in use until 1800.
Its earliest settings were those of 1740  by Predieri (Vienna, 28 August) and Porpora (Naples, 19
December, as Tiridate) as well as Sbacci.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 759; Wiel 397; Alm 923

Candace, overo Li veri amici Music by Gio. Battista Lampugnani
[CANDACE, OR THE TRUE FRIENDS]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Francesco Silvani by Domenico Lalli
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1740-11-19

Dedicated to Andrea d'Oria, Prince of Melfi?

As an autumn work, this adaptation of J veri amici (1712/8) is likely to have opened between 19 and
26 November 1740. It had been produced in Milan (the composer's city of origin) in 1732. Silvani's
text had also been set by Vivaldi (as RV 704) for performance in Mantua in 1720. The text was again
revived as Evergete (1748/8). Francesca Bertoli sang in the title role with Mariano Nitolini (Evergete),
Gio. Battista Pinacci (Amasi), Giuliano Terdocci (Lagide), and Angela Zanuchi (Tilame).

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 760; Wiel 393; Alm 924

3 Groppo (MS, p. 254) claims that the text for this work was Lalli's Amor tirannico (1710/6; 1722/6). It was varied once again from earlier
tales of the same figures fashioned by Bentivoglio (1669/3) and Marchi (1698/7).

*4 Otherwise known as La serva padrona.

5 Husband and wife. Although the name Widman is Bavarian, one branch of the family had long been included in the Venetian nobility.
26 Diario ordinario, No. 3636, p. 24.
27 Groppo MS, p. 254.

28 Groppo and Grove both credit Silvani, with revisions by Domenico Lalli, who wrote the dedication, and this appears to be the correct
interpretation. Groppo's manuscript amendments suggest that some aria texts were revised by Goldoni. Wiel credits Pariati and Lalli as the
librettists, but this is improbable since the story so much resembles that set by Paulati in 1712.

 The dedicatee was the descendant of a like-named forebear who was a celebrated general under Charles V.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 471

1740/7 Oronte, re de' sciti Music by Baldassare Galuppi
[ORONTES, KING OF THE SCYTHIANS]
A dramma per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli and a combattimento SORTING DATE: 1740-12-26
& Dedicated to Giovanni Giuseppe Maria Tomasi, Duke of Palma'
 In this fictional story which borrows names from antiquity, Orontes, the king of the Scythians, asked

Decebalos, the king of Dacia, for the hand of the princess Artalike. The aversion of both the princess
and her twin brother, Alcamenes, to Orontes caused Decebalos to withdraw his consent. Orontes prepared
a gruesome revenge, but Alcamenes's war against the Thracians provided a distraction. Goldoni's first
work for San Giovanni Grisostomo opened on 26 December 1740 (A).! The libretto had been dedicated
on the 23rd. Goldoni's text was reset in 1742 by Paolo Scalabrini for performance in Graz. In 1745
Jommelli and Hasse set it for Hamburg.

 Goldoni claimed that the music. ..was divine, the sets splendid, the actors superb, and the production
as a whole an enchanting spectacle.* Gio. Battista Pinacci sang in the title role, with Francesca Bertoli
as Artalike. Goldoni described the latter (whom he called Bagnoli) as a Roman whose singing matched
the beauty of her face and the vivacity of her spirit. She was good in male roles, he said, but she wanted
arole in which she could show offher feminine charms and graces. He described Pinacci, a Florentine,
as severe in manner, strong in action, and a baritone in range. Goldoni found the sets of Joli exceptional
and thought his own contribution was above his own average, although dramaturgically it was not the
purest of tragedies. He suggested that this was because he always tried to write his plays for the characters
of those who would perform in them.*

A Arias in A-Wgm; B-Bc; D-B, Dlb
Listed as Groppo 761; Wiel 394; Alm 927

1740/8 ArtameneTM Music attributed to Tomaso Albinoni et al.
[ARTAMENES]
A dramma per musica Text by Bartolomeo Vitturi
rd Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a combattimento and balli SORTING DATE: 1740-12-26?
& Dedicated to Marchioness Paola Visconti Litta*
OOo Artamenes was here an alias for Rana, one of the principal rajas of India and a descendant of the legendary

Poros. Padmane, the beautiful wife of Rana, was so admired by the Moghul emperor Akhbar that he
attacked the kingdom of Rana. Putting aside war for a diplomatic initiative, Akhbar offered peace if
Rana would consign Padmane to him.*' Artamene was probably first performed on 26 December 1740.*

3 Fifth duke of Palma (1717-92), fourth prince of Lampedusa, a Spanish grandee, and a forebear of the novelist Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa.
The island of Lampedusa lay between Tunisia and Spain. The name Palma [di Montechiaro] came from a river in southern Sicily.

3! Most dates given for Goldoni's works in Grove can be confirmed in the avvisi absorbed in the Diario ordinario. Here, however, the contents
of the avviso from Venice dated 31 December 1740 seem not to have been so absorbed.

 Memorie, i, 206. The sets were designed by Antonio Joli. The battles were directed by Santo Lanzarotti.
3 Goldoni's preface to Vol. 15 of his collected works (see Ortolani, TO, i, 740f).

+4 A noblewoman from Milan, she was the daughter of Giulio Visconti Borromeo Arese and the wife (from 1722) of the marquis Antonio Litta.
Both families were extraordinarily wealthy and the marriage was very much an alliance of the families.

*5 Although Vitturi describes this as a practice which was foreign even to those barbarians, the plot was simply from the common stock of
Venetian opera libretti, for in Moghul history Akhbar the Great (who had wives of many cultural and religious backgrounds) was considered
a paragon of generosity and kindness. This account had some debts to David's libretto for L 'amante eroe (1691/3).

36 This is the date given in Grove Opera. It also appears in Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 107. No news report from Venice for 31 December appears
in the Diario ordinario, but the survival of reports for adjacent weeks suggests (by the absence of a confirmation) that this date is at least
approximately correct. According to an archival report (I-Vas, Censori, Busta 6) cited in Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, 40, Artamene followed

472 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

The production would have ended before 27 January 1741. Gluck's setting of the same text opened
at the Haymarket Theatre in London on 4 March 1746. The cast included Giuseppe Fozzi (Artamene),
Catterina Aschieri (Padmane), and Laura Bambini (Akbar). Various arias in the work were chosen by
the singers.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 762; Wiel 400; Alm 928

1741/1 Berenice Music by Baldassare Galuppi

[BERENICE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Bartolomeo Vitturi

i Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1741-01-27

a Dedicated to Marquis Ippolito Monti*

ic) During the reign of Tigranes (Gaetano Baroni) in Armenia, the Persian king hoped to marry Aspasia
(Albina Aschieri), while the Parthian prince Atestes (Giuseppe Fozzi) was in love with Tigranes'
daughter, Berenice (Caterina Aschieri). After subduing Tigranes, Varrane (Laura Bambini) switched
his affections to Berenice. Berenice opened on 27 January 1741. A report of 11 February indicated
that the reception was not as good as had been hoped. This was attributed to the fact that the work was
a revival."!

fi Score in D-B; arias in D-Dlb; F-Pc; US-CAi, Cu
Listed as Groppo 763; Wiel 406; Alm 929

1741/2 Didone abbandonata Music by Andrea Bernasconi

[DIDO ABANDONED]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a combattimento and balli SORTING DATE: 1741-01-28

ica Dedicated to Giacomo San Vitale

OO This setting of Didone, which employed the text previously set by Albinoni (1724/12) and Sarri (1730/11),

opened on 28 January 1741.* Francesca Bertoli sang in the title role with Mariano Nicolini (Enea),
Gio. Battista Pinacci (Jarba), and Lugrezia Venturini Mariani (Se/ene). Santo Lanzarotti served as director
of the combattimento.

Tullo Ostilio (1740/3). In this case, the printer's date of 1740 (in distinction to the assignment of 1741 by Groppo and Alm) is correct, and
the work could have run during the last days of Carnival of the preceding winter (e.g., from 25 February or later until 1 March). However,
in the libretto for Artamene there is a faint clue that the later dating is correct. The costume designer (vestiario) was Sig. Natal Canciani, come
pure anche quello della Zenobia.

> Possibly presented with L impresario dell isole Canarie (libretto by Metastasio, music by Leo). A libretto for the performance of this intermezzo
at Sant' Angelo in 1741 was published (Sartori 12907).

>8 Identity undetermined. The family was of Lombard origin and had a villa near Parma.

* Wiel (Teatri, p. 137) notes that Allacci erroneously claimed that this libretto was a variant of Silvani's La fede tradita e vendicata, which
had been set by Gasparini (1704/1; revived in 1715/7), Albinoni (1707/5), and Vivaldi (1726/3). Groppo aligned it with two earlier accounts
of Berenice  those of Pasqualigo (set by Orlandini as 1725/1) and of Salvi (set by Araya as 1733/7). The first tale is derived from Gothic
legend, the second from Roman history.

* Diario ordinario, No. 3670, p. 11.

*' Diario ordinario, No. 3673, p. 2. But see Wiel's comments (above). Many libretti paraphrased others by transposing a skeletal story into
a different culture or time-frame. Apart from Orlandini's 1725 setting of Pasqualigo's text, Salvi's account was treated by Araya (Florence),
Sarri (Rome), and Handel (London, 1737). Another account, by Vitturi, was set by Salvatore Perillo for Sant' Angelo in 1759.

 The count Giacomo Antonio San Vitale founded an Arcadian colony in Parma in 1741.

* Diario ordinario, No. 3670, p. 11. Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 162) gives 22 January 1741 as the date for this work.

1741/3

1741/4

im

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 473

Score in D-Mbs (Munich, 1756)
Listed as Groppo 764; Wiel 404; Alm 930

Statira Music by Pietro Chiarini
[STATEIRA]

A dramma per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With Livietta e Tracollo; Serpina e Uberto SORTING DATE: 1741-05-10

Dedicated to Gio. Battista Negroni and Pier Francesco Grimaldi, Marquises of Genoa**

Goldoni's account explores the conflict between the heirs of King Darius from his first and second
marriages. From the first came Roxane (Bortola Gallo), who married his nephew Arbakes (Giovanni
Manzoli). From the second came Darius, whose widowed mother, Stateira (Antonia Cerminati), came
to occupy the Persian throne. After the death of Darius, however, Stateira enjoyed an intimate relationship
with Arbakes, while Roxane gradually transferred her affections to Darius's nephew, Learchos (Filippo
Elisi).> Statira opened on 10 May 1741," which was the date of dedication of the libretto. The text
was reset for later productions by Porpora (1742/1), Maggiore et al. (1751/5), and Scolari (1756).
No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 765; Wiel 407; Alm 931

Il vincitor di se stesso Music by Ignazio Fiorillo
[HE WHO CONQUERED HIMSELF]
A dramma per musica Text by Antonio Zaniboni*'
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Merlina e Galoppo; Grilletta e Porsugnacco;

Serpilla e Bacocco* SORTING DATE: 1741-11-04

Dedicated to Karl Philipp Lasteras

The story is a variant of that told by Pasqualigo in Mitridate...vincitor di se stesso (1723/1). Ismene
has become Roxane, Ephesus has become Nicaea, and the amorous caprice is now a conventional
engagement. J] vincitor opened on 4 November 1741, which was also the date of dedication of the
libretto. The cast included Felice Novelli (Mitridate), Margherita Chimenti (Rosanne), Giuseppe
Bracceschi (Farnace), and Stefano Leonardi (Siffare).

Aria in I-Mc

Listed as Groppo 766; Wiel 405; Alm 932

 The Negroni were a wealthy Genovese family involved in banking; they were of Spanish origin. The Grimaldi owned numerous lands in
areas around Genoa. Goldoni was soon to accept the position of consul for the Republic of Genoa. In the dedication of this libretto he praised
not only the men but also their wives.

5 It was quite a departure both for the theater and for the dramatist to treat such a serious subject during the spring season.

* Diario ordinario, No. 3714, p. 10. On 29 May, just as the Ascension Fair was ending, the Council of Ten passed a law prohibiting the use
of masks and the public celebration of feasts whenever the selection of a patriarch was under consideration (Benigna, Memorie, f. 73v).
F. A. Correr had died on 17 May; it was to be six months before a successor was in place (see Appendix 1); the injunction was lifted by 1

November.

7 A Bolognese patrician; also a count.

48 According to Groppo's annotations, Monsieur de Porsugnacco was replaced during this production by Serpilla e Bacocco (Il marito giocatore).
The last work is not cited by Wiel.

* The dedication was signed by Domenico Maria Creta.
 See the Diario ordinario, No. 3789, p. 10.

474 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1741/5 Tigrane Music by Giuseppe Arena*!
[TIGRANES]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With operazioni militari and balli SORTING DATE: 1741-11-18
& Dedicated to Count Prospero Valmarana, P. V.*
oo Tigranes II the Great (Lorenzo Gherardi) was allied with Mithridates (Francesco Tolve), whose

daughter Cleopatra (Vittoria Tesi Tramontini) he married. There were many other settings of the text,
including those of Gluck (Crema, 1743), Dal Barba (Verona, 1744), and Lampugnani (1747/6). The
work remained popular throughout the century. Arena's work opened on 18 November 1741 and was
to have a total of eighteen performances. The libretto was dedicated by Goldoni, the current impresario
of the theater, on the 17th.

Ow The theater management had recently been reorganized such that there were seven directors in charge
of dancers, painters, costume-makers, porters, operatives, and servants, while there were eleven others
for the selection of musicians, maestri, librettists, and the orchestra.** It may have been on account
of this reorganization that much comment was directed towards Tigrane. Its dances, scenery, and costumes
were applauded. The final scene, in the temple of Jupiter, must have been macabre. Instruments of
sacrifice were shown and urns were prepared for the victims.

 The theater's acoustics were held to have sabotaged the music. Giuseppe Galli-Bibiena, who was called
in as an acoustic consultant, considered it a flaw that the theater was square rather than egg-shaped.
To remedy this, he dug two holes under the orchestra to make little wells at the edges of the stage.
His modifications were considered a success.*

 Exact figures for ticket sales indicate that the overall attendance was mediocre, with gross sales of 6,730
bollettini to occupants of the boxes and rentals of 539 scagni. The gross revenues were 26,920 lire from
the boxes and 1,342 from the parterre, producing a total of 28,262 lire. Arena was paid 2,420 lire for
his services. The theater netted 850 ire from the sale of libretti after paying a gift (regalo) to Goldoni.**

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 767; Wiel 403; Alm 933

1741/6 Merope Music by Niccold Jommelli
[MEROPE]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Bartolomeo Vitturi
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo and giochi SORTING DATE: 1741-12-26
e Dedicated to the Venetian nobility

5! Arena (1713-84), born on Malta, was an organist trained in Naples. He was the author of a practical treatise of playing the harpsichord and
organ. His career as a composer of operas seems to have been limited to the years 1738-46.

 By Carlo Goldoni, who claimed credit for the work, and Bartolomeo Vitturi, who contributed three new arias (Alm, Catalog, p. 595).
* This young count was from Vicenza; his family was admitted to the Venetian nobility in 1658 (Ortolani, TO, xii, 1189).

*4 Groppo MS, p. 200, gives the names of these maestri. Painters, engineers, dancers, etc. were selected by Zaccaria Canal, Niccold Venier,
Daniel Dolfin, Giacomo Soranzo, Marco Contarini, the physical doctor Saletti, and the merchant Giovanni Giacomo Herz. Composers, librettists,
and musicians were in the charge of Alvise Mocenigo, Pietro Foscarini, Alessandro Zeno, Michiel Grimani, Alvise Foscarini, Almore Pisani,
Bortolomio Gradenigo, Andrea Tron, Simon Contarini, Bonono Algarotti (a count), and the merchant Bortolo Bernardi.

55 Diario ordinario, No. 3798, p. 20.
%6 Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, 101, citing privately held documents.
57 Identified in the libretto not only as the Neapolitan maestro di cappella but also as a member of the Bolognese Accademia Filarmonica.

58 One aria was by the count Giacomo San Vitale.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 475

Oo Merope opened on 26 December 1741.* The production had twenty-one performances. Zeno's text
had been set by Gasparini (1712/1) and Giacomelli (1734/5) and remained in use into the next century.

 On 13 January 1742 Merope was warmly praised for its sumptuous costumes, music, and magnificent
scenery.*' Between Acts One and Two games of chance (giochi di lotta) were played ona float shaped
like an amphitheater. The succeeding production at San Giovanni Grisostomo (Porpora's Statira, 1742/1)
was terminated after only three performances in order to revive Merope. The libretto for the revival,
which consisted of another nine performances, was dedicated to ladies. Vittoria Tesi [Tramontini]
sang in the title role, with Francesco Tolve as Polyphontes.

 Merope was a stellar financial success. It enjoyed bollettini sales of 9,141 for the first run and 4,686
for the second, with proceeds of 36,564 lire and 18,744 lire respectively. Sales of scagni were
correspondingly robust, totaling 909 for the first run and 422 for the second. Folding-seat rentals added
proceeds of 2,384 lire and 844 lire respectively. The gross income from all these sources was 58,536
lire. Jommelli's regalo was 2,684 lire, with a later supplement of 12 zecchini.

A Scores in D-DIb, Mbs; GB-LbI; arias in D-Hs; US-BEm (seconda)
Listed as Groppo 768; Wiel 413; Alm 934, 935

1741/7 Ambleto* Music by Giuseppe CarcaniTM
[HAMLET]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno and Pietro Pariati

MM Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)

With Dorina e Nibbio; Grilletta e Ombrone;
Serpilla e Bacocco; Serpina e Uberto
& Dedicated to Count Giacomo San Vitale SORTING DATE: 1741-12-26
OOo The cast for Ambleto, based on a lightly revised version of the text set by Gasparini as 1705/10, included
Giuseppe Bracceschi (Ambleto), Giacinta Forcellini (Veremonda), and Felice Novelli (Fengone). Ambleto
opened on 26 December 1741.% Like Merope, it attracted a substantial audience. The title-page is dated
1742. Carcani's setting was also performed in Vienna on 3 February 1742.
fi Duet in GB-LbI; arias in I-Fc; US-CAi, Cu
Listed as Groppo 769; Wiel 416; Alm 936

* Diario ordinario, No. 3813, p. 12. The title-page is dated 1742.
 Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, 101.
*' Diario ordinario, No. 3821, p. 2.

 Groppo MS, p. 262f. The apparent opening date of the revival would have been 27 January. The nine performances would have been on
27-31 January and 3-6 February.

 Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, 100f.

 Carcani (1703-78) had come to Venice in 1739, when he replaced Hasse as maestro di cappella at the Incurabili. He returned to Piacenza
in 1744 upon being named to the same post at its cathedral.

 With new arias by Anton Maria and Girolamo Zanetti (Groppo MS, p. 261). The first, an engraver and art historian, was appointed by the
Inquisition to enforce the law stating that no important artwork could be restored or exported without government permission (Susan Filter,
Book and Paper Group Annual, 1994). Zanetti served as superintendent of books of San Marco.

 According to Groppo (MS, p. 261 f) each of these intermezzi succeeded its predecessor, with the last (otherwise known as La serva padrona)
having been given for the last eight performances. To sustain a run long enough to accommodate so many changes, the reception of Ambleto
must have been very enthusiastic.

" Diario ordinario, No. 3813, p. 12. This information conflicts with the account in NGDMM/2, in which Francesco Bussi (I, 728) lists the
premiere of Ambleto as having occurred in the winter of 1742 (suggesting the 1741/42 season).

476 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1742/1 Statira Music by Nicold Porpora
[STATEIRA]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Francesco Silvani by Carlo Goldoni
rT Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1742-01-24
(a) Without dedicatee
 This text of Statira was recycled from Lotti's // tradimento, traditor di se stesso (1711/2). The story

of the widow of Alexander the Great had been treated by Goldoni and Chiarini only eight months earlier
in 1741/3. Statira opened as the third drama on 24 January 1742 (DO).

BOE The final set featured the mausoleum of Cyrus, where a grotesque scene was transformed into a festive
one featuring a chorus of singers and a group of wind players. Vittoria Tesi Tramontini sang in the title
role with Antonia Negri Tomi (Aspasia), Francesco Tolve (Artaserse), and Lorenzo Ghirardi (Dario).
However, the work was not well received. After three performances on successive evenings, the
production was cancelled and a revival of Merope (1741/6) was substituted. Statira generated sales
of 1,679 bollettini and the rental of 278 stools (scagni). The total proceeds from both sources of revenue
came to 6,802 lire, of which Porpora was paid 2,420 lire.

A Score in US-We
Listed as Groppo 770; Wiel 412; Alm 937

1742/2 Cirene' Music by Pietro Pellegrini
[KYRENE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Silvio Stampiglia
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Fat Week)
With Grilletta e Porsugnacco; Serpina e Uberto SORTING DATE: 1742-01-30
a Dedicated to Marquis Annibale Palmieri
ic?) In this loose paraphrase of Stampiglia's libretto for Partenope (set by Caldara as 1707/14), the Arcadian

princess Kyrene (Margherita Chimenti) was kidnapped by Apollo on Mt. Pelios and taken to Libya.
Cirene opened on 30 January, one week before Shrove Tuesday, in 1742; the 30th was also the date
of dedication of the libretto. Its run would necessarily have been limited to the nights of 30-31 January
and 3-6 February.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 771; Wiel 415; Alm 938

1742a Endimione. See Suppl. 5d.

 In 1742 Porpora was maestro delle figlie at the Pieta. Wiel (Teatri, p. 139) points out that Groppo mistakenly gives Chiarini and Goldoni
(who had created a work with this title in 1741) as the creators of this work. Groppo (MS, p. 264) accepts Silvani as the initiator but says the
text was revised by Goldoni.

 Diario ordinario, No. 3826 (27 Gennaro 1742), p. 7.

 According to Groppo (MS, p. 262f), it ran only on the Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday of Fat Week (Ja settimana grassa, or the last week
before Lent). The dates would have been 31 January2 February; in this case the Diario could not have given a notice (suggesting that its
revival spanned nine nights) on 27 January. The theaters would have been closed in either case for the feast of Santa Maria Formosa and its
vigil. With Shrove Tuesday on 6 February, a revival of Merope could have achieved six performances before the feast and three after only
if it began on 25 January (the night after the opening of Statira).

TM The composer's fee seems to have been fixed, since Porpora's is little different from Jommelli's for Merope. The much greater receipts for
Merope obviously rendered the composer's fee a much smaller percentage.

 Pellegrini was a Brescian organist. This was the only opera by him to be given in Venice.
 The Palmieri were an aristocratic family associated with Bari and Lecce.

4 Groppo (MS, p. 263) explains that in 1742 Giovedi Grasso [Fat Thursday] conflicted with the vigil of the feast of Santa Maria Formosa,
for which reason Fat Week began on the preceding Tuesday (30 January) instead of the following day.

1742/3

t.B

OGL

1742/4

1

fs)
OOo

1742/5

i

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 477

La Zanina, maga per amore Music derived from Giuseppe Maria Buini
[ZANINA, THE SORCERESS OF LOVE]

A dramma per musica Text by Giuseppe Maria Buini
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1742-05-02

Without dedicatee

The character of La Zanina is both simple and satirical. Fidalbo has switched his amorous interests
from Zanina to Emirena, who has already been claimed by Celindo. Emirena's father, Armano, has
his own plans for his daughter's future. The work was billed as an opera bernesca when it was given
in Vienna in September 1747.

La Zanina opened on 2 May 1742. Antonia Bertelli sang in the title role (in Bolognese dialect) with
Pellegrino Gaggiotti (Armano). Both performers, who were well known interpreters of comic intermezzi,
had appeared in the original production, given near Bologna (S. Giovanni in Persiceto) for the Accademici
Candidi Uniti in the autumn of 1737. Other members of the cast included Domenico Negri (Fidalbo),
Caterina Bassi Negri (Emirena), and Angela Romani (Celindo). The impresario at San Moise was now
Cesare Gargante, formerly of Sant' Angelo.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 774; Wiel 418; Alm 941

Demetrio [or Cleonice ] Music by Christoph Willibald von Gluck
[DEMETRIOS]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1742-05-02

Dedicated to Francesco Spadafora

Gluck's debut work for Venice opened on 2 May 1742,* the eve of Ascension. Its libretto was dedicated
on the Ist. Felice Salimbeni sang in the title role, with Barbara Stabili (Cleonice) and Ottavio Albuzio
(Fenicio). Metastasio's text had been set by Hasse for San Giovanni Grisostomo as 1732/2 and revived
at both San Cassiano (as 1737/2) and Sant' Angelo (as 1740/1, called Cleonice).

Arias in B-Bc; CH-BEI; S-Uu

Listed as Groppo 773; Wiel 417; Alm 940

Artaserse Music attributed to Giuseppe Antonio Paganelli*!
[ARTAXERXES]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Salvatore SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1742-05-02

> Buini had composed the music for the original production (1737) but had died two years later. In the absence of surviving music, the 1742

production is assumed to have been a pastiche.
"6 Diario ordinario, No. 3868, p. 16.

7' Revealed in a stragiudiziale presented by the notary Ottaviano Maria Malipiero on 9 May 1742 and copied in I-Vcg 42 F 2/2 (7). Gargante
was owed 25 ducats for four boxes belonging to two members of the Dolfin family. In May 1743 Gargante was still owed 30 ducats for the
same season by Ferdinando Crivelli.

*8 The only previous opera by Gluck (1714-87) was a setting of Metastasio's Artaserse, which opened in Milan on 26 December 1741.

 A patrician from the Veneto, according to the libretto, although the surname was shared by Sicilian aristocrats.
 Diario ordinario, No. 3868, p. 12.
*! With a few arias by other composers (Groppo MS, p. 265).

478 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

&) Dedicated to Count Isidoro Molinari

OGL Metastasio's text on the Persian ruler had been set by more than a dozen composers since 1730. Artaserse
opened on 2 May 1742," the eve of Ascension. The libretto had been dedicated anonymously on the
Ist. Elena Venier sang in the title role with Marc'Antonio Marieschi (Artabano) and Rosa Costa
(Mandane). The cast included Rosanna Scalfi (Arbace), the widow of Benedetto Marcello. A contralto
who apparently had the unusually broad tessitura required in some of Marcello's more expressive secular
vocal works, Scalfi never appeared before or after on a public stage.** This was the last opera to be
given at San Salvatore until 1753. Legal proceedings resulted in the closure of many of the theater's
boxes. After two years claims were resolved in favor of the theater's impresari.*

A Aria (attrib. Adolfati) in US-CHh
Listed as Groppo 775; Wiel 419; Alm 942

1742/6 Bajazet Music attributed to Andrea Bernasconi*
[BAYEZID]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Agostino Piovene by Giacomo San Vitale
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1742-10-15~
& Dedicated to the Ladies
Sac) Piovene's text, first set by Gasparini as Tamerlano (1711/3), had had revivals in Reggio (1719) and

Venice (1723/4). Bernasconi's setting was itself to be revived in Munich (1754) and Prague (1762).
Quite uncharacteristically for San Giovanni Grisostomo, the season's first opera, which represented
several new initiatives simultaneously, opened before 17 October 1742, when Girolamo Zanetti wrote
a caustic commentary on every aspect of the production.

SE The sets, by Galli-Bibiena (the theatrical designer for the empress Maria Theresia), cost more than 1,000
ducats. While Groppo reported that the most sumptuous scenes made by Sig. Bibiena. ..[constituted]
a perfect architecture,*' Zanetti said they were not beautiful and noted that in them Gothic, Greek,
and Roman elements were intermixed. Some columns seemed to stand in the sea.** Zanetti found
Piovene's text to be antique.

IoE@) Zanetti saved his most cutting comments for the singers, among whom were Gio. Battista Pinacci in
the title role, Settimio Canini (Zamerlano), Vittoria Tesi (Asteria), and Giustina Turcotti (/rene). Zanetti
found that Tesi, although old, recited well but sang badly, as usual. He described Canini as a blind
tenor with one eye [who was] undeserving. Pinacci, an alto, came across to him as a raging beast.
Turcotti sang very well but was fat to the point of deformity and could not move about the stage.
The little musician called [Domenico] Bucella [Clearco] was bearable, but did not have much voice.
The others [Giacomo Zaghini and Alessandro Veroni] were still worse. In sum, the opera was not
even alittle bit pleasing. Yet Zanetti's opinion cannot have been widely shared, for Groppo reported

 Apparently from an aristocratic family seated near Parma.
8 Diario ordinario, No. 3868, p. 12.
* For a listing of her compositions, see E. Selfridge-Field, The Works of Benedetto and Alessandro Marcello, pp. 385-88.

85 See I-Vcg, Archivio Vendramin, 42 F 2, Fasc. 2, Estragiudiziali. A three-year contract of 16 Marzo 1742 (loc. cit., F 6, Fasc. 4) stipulated
that the impresari were responsible for renting boxes which were previously assigned to ambassadors; for collecting tickets and selling sundries
(including folding chairs); for splitting the rents for boxes assigned by the season or from night to night on a 50/50 basis with the Vendramin
family; for funding at least four changes of scene; and for admitting without charge three friends of the theater owners per evening.

 Sometimes attributed to Jommelli. Some arias in act two were by Domenico Fabris (Groppo MS, p. 265).
87 Groppo MS, p. 265.
88 Girolamo Zanetti: Memorie per servire all'istoria della inclita citta di Venezia, Archivio veneto, ser. xv, vol. xxix (1885)/i,104.

 Zanetti, Memorie,, pp. 121f, La Tesi, benche vecchia, recitava bene ma cantava malissimo al solito....Un tenor orbo da un occhio era
indegno: si chiamava Canini....L'alto, per nome Pinacci, era un furibondo bestione. La seconda donna detta Turcotti cantava molto bene;
ma era diformemente grassa a segno che non poteva mouversi. Un'altro piccolo musico detto Bacella [sic] era soffribile, ma non avea molto

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49). 479

that the aria of the beautiful Irene [Turcotti] was sung five times. This was the first production for
which the balli were directed by Joseph Salamon, who had come, like Galli-Bibiena, from the imperial
court. Zanetti found them hardly pleasurable.!

A Arias in D-Mbs (Munich, 1754); I-Vqs
Listed as Groppo 777; Wiel 411; Alm 944

1742/7 Barsina Music by Giuseppe Antonio Paganelli
[BarsINna]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
rd Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1742-11-10
& Without dedicatee

OOo Minor changes were made to this text concerning the second wife of Alexander the Great, which had
previously been set by Porta as La costanza combattuta in amore (1716/6) and by Galeazzi as II trionfo
della costanza (1731/1). The scenery was recycled from earlier works. Barsina, the first opera to be
given at San Cassiano since 1738, opened on 10 November 1742. The title-page carries indications
for both MDCCXLII and MDCCXLIII. The libretto could have been reprinted for a revival following
the brief production of Atalo (1742/9). Anna Cosimi appeared in the title role with a predominantly
Roman cast. The Empress Maria Theresia and her consort attended an opening of the same work in
Vienna on 5 June 1743.TM A version revised by Antonio Denzio was given in Munich in 1747.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 776; Wiel 408; Alm 943

1742/8 SemiramideTM Music by Niccole Jommelli
[SEMIRAMIS]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Francesco Silvani by Domenico Fabris
M1 Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1742-12-26
& Dedicated to the Ladies
Owe Considering the popularity of Metastasio's text on the subject of Semiramide riconosciuta, it is curious

that Jommelli reverted to Silvani's earlier one, once set by C. F. Pollarolo (1714/1). Semiramide opened,
with sets by Galli-Bibiena and choreography by Joseph Salamon, on 26 December 1742. As the curtain
rose, Semiramis's chariot was carried onto the stage by Moorish slaves. The most carefully described
scene was the second of Act Two, in which the temple of the Sun was of Gothic architecture. It opened
into three arcades from which the Sacred Wood could be seen. Vittoria Tesi Tramontini sang in the
title role, with Giacomo Zaghini (Memnone), Giustina Turcotti (Aspasia), and Domenico Bucella (Oronte,
the king of the Arabs).
A Score in D-SI
Listed as Groppo 778; Wiel 423; Alm 945

voce. Gli altri erano pessimi. Insomma |' opera non piacque ne pronto ne pocco.

 Groppo MS, p. 265.

>! Zanetti, loc. cit.

* Groppo MS, pp. 263ff. For the libretto of // trionfo, see Sartori 23768.

 Diario ordinario, No. 3948, p. 8, in which the title is given as Bersina.

* Grossegger, Theater, p. 14.

5 Jommelli's appointment as maestro del coro at the Incurabili is generally dated from 1743.
 Diario ordinario, No. 3969, p. 10.

480

1742/9

i

&
08

fi

 1742b
1743/1

im

&
OOo

1743/2

V1

8
a)

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Atalo Music by Giovanni Chintzer'
[ATALOs]

A dramma per musica Text adapted anonymously from Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1742-12-27~

Without dedicatee

Atalo was an adaptation of Silvani's La verita nell inganno (1713/4), with the role of Eumenes eliminated.
The date of opening can be estimated from the fact that owing to its poor reception, Atalo was closed
after one nightTM and a revival of Barsina (1742/7) was mounted forthwith. Chintzer's work enjoyed
a revival (as La verita nell'inganno) in Munich in 1747.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 779; Wiel 409; Alm 946

La pace. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Ambleto* Music by Giuseppe Carcani
[HAMLET]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati'
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1743-01-19
Without dedicatee

This production of Ambleto (on a text revised from 1705/10) opened on or shortly before 19 January
1743.'"' Four arias were changed from 1741/7.' Gio. Domenico Ciardini sang in the title role. According
to an agent's report, a knife was thrown against the main door of the theater at about 3:00 O.V.'
Duet (1741) in GB-Lbl; arias (1741) in I-Fe; US-CAi, Cu

Listed as Groppo 780; Wiel 427; Alm 947

Alessandro nell' Indie Music by Johann Adolf Hasse!
[ALEXANDER IN INDIA]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio'
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1743-01-19

Dedicated to the Ladies

Metastasio's text was first staged in Venice in Pescetti's setting (1732/1). Hasse's setting of it had first
been given (under the title C/eofide) in Dresden in 1731 and had been very successfully produced in

7 A Florentine composer of commedie per musica and a distinguished trumpet player and teacher.

8 Anelaborate production seems to have been planned, however. Camels and elephants were to be visible in the opening scene. Gio. Domenico
Ciardini was cast in the title role, with Anna Cosimi (Arsinoe) and Caterina Baratti (Laodice).

 Groppo MS, p. 266. The printer's date (Carnival 1742) cannot be correct. The possibility of an opening in early January 1743 cannot be
eliminated, but an opening in the last week of December would have positioned the prospective production squarely between Barsina (1742/7)
and Engelberta (1743/4). Any production subsequent to Barsina would have fallen in Carnival 1743, so the erroneous printer's date cannot
provide a determination between late December and early January.

 With contributions by Anton Maria and Girolamo Zanetti (Groppo MS, p. 266).
'! Diario ordinario, No. 3982, p. 2.

' Groppo MS, p. 266.

'3 1_Vas, IS, Busta 924, fasc. Sant'Angelo, item of 19 Gennaro 1743.

4 With arias by Checo Pontiamola (Groppo MS, p. 267).

'5 Text revisions attributed to Michel Angiolo Boccardi (Joc. cit.).

1743/3

fi

 1743a
1743/4

im

&
oR

e@

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 481

Venice (1736/1, 1738/1). Gio. Battista Pinacci now sang in the title role, with Vittoria Tesi Tramontini
(Cleofide), Giustina Turcotti (Erisena), and Giacomo Zaghini (Poro). This third drama opened in
Venice on c. 19 January 1743' with scenery by Galli-Bibiena.

Scores in B-Bc (1743) et al.'

Listed as Groppo 781; Wiel 421; Alm 948

Engelberta Music by Giuseppe Antonio Paganelli
[ENGELBERTA]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Apostolo Zeno by Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1743-02-04~
Without dedicatee

This resetting of the text of 1709/5 appears to have been put into production between 27 January and
9 February 1743.'* The printer's date of the libretto is 1742 M.V. Anna Cosimi sang in the title role
with Gio. Domenico Ciardini in the role of the villainous Ludwig II and Caterina Barat[ti] as Engelberta's
daughter Matilda.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 782; Wiel 410; Alm 949

Rutzvanscad il giovine. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Siroe Music by Gennaro Manna!
[SIROES]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio by Domenico Fabris'
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1743-02-09

Dedicated to the Ladies

Siroe opened on 9 February 1743. Giacomo Zaghini took the title role, in a cast including Gio. Battista
Pinacci (Cosroe), Vittoria Tesi Tramontini (Emira), and Giustina Turcotti (Laodice). Vinci's setting
had been given as 1726/2 and 1731/6. Among many further settings of this popular work, Haym's
adaptation of the text for Handel's like-named work (HWV 24) had been produced in London in 1728.
Zanetti found Siroe to be moderately good. He said that the sets were less bad than most of those
made by [Galli-]Bibiena but claimed that the architect's machine representing Immortality was silly
(una freddura) and of little relevance to the work. The four cloud-machines that descended on little
transparent columns were beautiful and good.'!' The scenery changes were apparently introduced
in conjunction with the architect's new acoustical remodeling of the theater.

Score (Act 3 only) in I-Nf

Listed as Groppo 783; Wiel 422; Alm 950

'6 Diario ordinario, No. 3982, p. 2.

'' For additional sources, of which there are many, see the listings for 1736 and 1738.

'8 Reports from Venice for these weeks are missing from the Diario ordinario, and the work is unreported in adjacent issues. The observance
of Santa Maria Formosa on | and 2 February eliminates two dates in this span.

' This Neapolitan maestro's name was printed in title-size type in the cast list of the libretto.

' Fabris's revisions are noted in Zanetti's account (see below).

'" Girolamo Zanetti, report of 10 febraro 1743 as quoted in Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, 122.

482

1743/5

Ml

A

 1743b
 1743

1743/6

m1

12

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

La Contessina Music attributed to Giacomo Maccari
[THE LITTLE CounTESsS]

A commedia per musica (operetta buffa) Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1743-02-13~
Without dedicatee

La Contessina, written in the autumn of 1742 while Goldoni was still serving as Venetian consul to
the Republic of Genoa, was given by comedians at San Samuele in the winter of 1743." Its opening
cannot be dated to the day or week, since the rest of the theater's repertory is undocumented.

Often considered the first dramma giocoso con musica to be given in Venice, the work was received
with great enthusiasm (riusci a meraviglia). The vain little countess was the daughter of Count
Baccellone Parabolano. Lindoro, the son of the rich merchant Pancrazio, has fallen in love with her
after only six days in Venice, but she, being in search of a cicisbeo, shows little interest in him. The
gondoliere Gazzetta also plays arole in the plot. The classic conflict between an impoverished nobility
and a rich bourgeoisie had been a staple of French comedy since the time of Louis XIV.

The cast is not given in the libretto. Sacchi's troupe had left San Samuele to go to St. Petersburg in
1742 and that of Falchi, from the Bavarian court, had now been engaged. Goldoni wrote the title role
for Signora Baccherini of the new troupe. She was beautiful and no less astute than [Elisabetta] Passalac-
qua, the dramatist wrote.'?

The text had a long success. It was revived at San Giovanni Grisostomo in the autumn of 1754'"4 and
was later set by such figures as Lampugnani (Milan, 1759) and Piccinni (Verona, 1775). Calzabigi's
revision was set by Floriano Gassmann both in Italian (Vienna, 1771; Pavia, 1782 et al.) and in Danish
translation (Copenhagen, 1778). It was also used by Cimarosa (Bologna, 1778) and others.''*

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 784; Wiel 430; Alm 9511'S

La forza del sangue. Cf. Suppl. 5b.
La ninfa Apollo. Cf. Suppl. 5b.

Ezio Music by Giovanni Battista Lampugnani
[AETIUS]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1743-05-22
Without dedicatee

The text for Ezio was well known from earlier settings, the first of which had been Porpora's for San
Giovanni Grisostomo (1728/8). Ezio opened on 22 May 1743 (A),'' when it was reported to have received
universal applause. Its reception may subsequently have been hampered by the fact that Venice was
besieged by a particularly wintery storm on the 23rd. The character of the Ascension fair in 1743 was

Groppo (MS, p. 268) says it was given nel tempo della comedia, which would often (but not always) have meant the autumn. Ortolani

(TO, x, 1265) notes that the libretto was written in the autumn of 1742. The libretto specifies Carnevale 1743.

"3 Goldoni, preface to the collected works, Vol. XVII (see Ortolani, TO, i, 749). He may have had her in mind when, shortly afterwards, he
wrote La donna del garbo.

"4 Groppo MS, p. 308.
"5 Ortolani, TO, x, 1265.
"6 Also Sartori 6468.

'" The avvisi cited for this year are interleaved with Pallade veneta MSS in I-Vas, IS, Miscellanea di Atti Diversi, Filza 58/1. The event
is also mentioned in the Diario ordinario, No. 4032, p. 12, and in G, Zanetti's Memorie, pp. 130-39.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 483

also affected indirectly by the fear that a contagion in Messina could be imported by arriving visitors.
Benigna's comment on the scarcity of tourists in May and June is suggestive.''* These circumstances
did little damage to the work's reputation. The text remained in use through the end of the century.
 The production was something of a singers' reunion. In his first Venetian appearance since 1729,
Giovanni Carestini's singing in the title role did him great honor, according to Girolamo Zanetti.
Celebrated for his major roles in several Handel operas, Carestini was later praised by Charles Burney
for his powerful and clear voice [he was first a soprano, later an alto], by Hasse for his perfect style
of singing, and by Quantz for his extraordinary virtuosity.''? In her only Venetian appearance
postdating Vivaldi's death, Anna Gird appeared as Fulvia. Giuseppe Santarelli took the role of the
emperor Valentinian, who loved Fulvia despite her betrothal to Aetius.
fi Arias in I-Bc
Listed as Groppo 787; Wiel 431; Alm 954

1743/7 La finta cameriera Music by Gaetano Latilla
[THE FALSE CHAMBERMAID]
A divertimento giocoso Text attributed to Giovanni Barlocci'
im Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1743-05-22
&y Without dedicatee
aXe) La finta cameriera, which opened on 22 May 1743 (A)'?! and met with universal applause, is regarded

as the first Neapolitan-style comic opera (or opera bernesca') given in Venice. It is an acknowledged
descendent of the commedia per musica called Gismondo (Naples, 1737; text by G. A. Federico). The
influence of commedia dell'arte is evident in its characterizations. Giocondo (Elisabetta Ronchetti),
a young man from Leghorn/Livorno, has presented himself as Alessandra to become a servant in the
house of Pancrazio (Giuseppe Ristorini), an elderly Florentine gentleman living in Rome. Pancrazio's
daughter Erosmina (Costanza Rosignoli) is engaged to Don Colascione (Francesco Baglioni) but falls
in love with the new maid.! Other roles include those of Betta (Ginevra Magagnoli), Dorina (Viviana
Bosellini), and Filindo (Luigi Ristorini). Its performers were all from Bologna.

 According to Girolamo Zanetti, the work was considered moderately beautiful. The oldest of the
performers was twenty-three.'TM* As the two weeks of its production passed, Zanetti's reports became
steadily more enthusiastic. On the 24th he described it as an opera ridicola which was starting to please
to excess, particularly on account of certain duets. On the 29th he termed it an opera burlesca which
was still very pleasing. On the 31st it was styled an opera bernesca again pleasing to excess. By
now, the portrayer of Don Colascione (Francesco Baglioni) was receiving special praise for making

"8 Benigna, Memorie, f. 83, entry of 21 maggio, with addendum for giugno.
"? Quoted from Dale E. Monson, Carestini, Giovanni, GO, iii, 731.

' According to NG, the current text was by Gennaro Antonio Federico, with revisions by Barlocci. According to the Groppo MS, p. 275,
La finta cameriera was derived from a prose comedy by Simone Falconio Pratoli; the original date would have had to be anterior to 1738.
However, the actions of Giocondo seem curiously reminiscent of the episode in Richardson's novel Pamela (London, 1740-41) in which Mr.
B. hid in a closet of the servant Pamela as she undressed before going to bed. Goldoni prepared a dramatization of Richardson's Pamela, or
Virtue Rewarded (London, 1740) in Italian in 1741 (cf. Suppl. 2c for the 1750 production). He wrote in his memoirs (p. 283) that according
to the French definition, Pamela was a drama, but the public found it interesting and entertaining, and among all my works given up to that
point, this is the one which was the most successful.

"1 In some avvisi, the work was entitled La finta schiava. Its opening was also reported in the Diario ordinario, No. 4032, p. 12.
'2Bernesco simply meant burlesque, but in relation to opera the term was used in diverse ways. A comic intermezzo, L affettatione castigato,
given in Vienna in 1731, for example, was characterized as musica bernesca.

"3 Groppo (MS, p. 275) suggests that the text was derived, with help from Sig. Carnaccia, from a prose comedy by Simone Falconio Pratoli.
In northern Italy a colascione was a plucked instrument with two strings.

'4 But their route to Venice may not have been direct. Ronchetti appears in Don Chichibio in Toledo in 1739.

484

1743/8

e

1743/9

rT

&

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

audiences laugh so hard that they split their sides.'?> Baglioni, who had played in Medebach's comedy
troupe since 1730,' made his operatic debut in the Roman production of this work (as La giardiniera
contessa,'*' Teatro Valle, 1738). The figure of the finta cameriera became a fixture of comic works.
The Venetian version was based on the production given in Faenza in 1741.'"* A one-act version was
produced in London as Don Colascio (1748); Favourite Songs from it were published in the same year
by Walsh. Galuppi's Das verstellte Kammermddgen, composed for Brunswick while he was maestro
di cappella in Naples, employed essentially the same text. One of the last performances was given in
Paris (1752). The text was in frequent use through 1760.

Scores in B-Bc (Naples, 1745); F-Po (Paris, 1752); I-Fc (Rome, 1738)!

Listed as Groppo 788; Wiel 432; Alm 955, 956

Il troiano schernito in Cartagine

nascente e moribonda Anonymous pastiche'?
[THE TROJAN SCORNED IN CARTHAGE AS IT ROSE AND FELL] Text attributed to Giuseppe Imer'*!
A dramma per musica'?
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's?)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1743-11-09~
Without dedicatee

This parody of Didone abbandonata was given by the Imer troupe during the autumn of 1743. It included
roles for Dido, Aeneas, Jarba (king of the Moors), and others plus choruses of Dido's guards, Aeneas's
Trojans, and Jarba's Moors. Dido and Selene sing the well-known folksong La Girometta as Carthage
burns.'*? In 1743 comedy houses opened on 7 October, but the character of // trioano suggests a position
closer to the middle of November.

No musical sources known

Groppo 791; Wiel 429; Alm 960

Arsace Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi'TM
[ARSAKES]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Antonio Salvi
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1743-11-16

Dedicated to the Ladies

"5 Zanetti, Memorie, pp. 130ff. The text for the last report cited reads, I musico che rappresenta il personaggio di don Calascione fa crepare
la gente dalle risa. The information on age cannot be entirely correct. Giuseppe Ristorini (Pancrazio) had made his Venetian opera debut
in Albinoni's Scipione nelle Spagne (1724), while Ginevra Magagnoli (Betta) had appeared with Domenico Cricchi in the intermezzo La serva
padrona at Sant' Angelo in the 1741-42 season. The remaining members of the cast  Elisabetta Ronchetti, Costanza Rosignoli, Vivana Bosellini,
and Luigi Ristorini  were all new to the Venetian stage.

"6 Heartz, Vis Comica, p. 36. Inall, ten members of the Baglioni family appeared in Venetian operas over the course of the next half-century.

"7 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i/2, 462.
"8 Groppo MS, p. 269.
9 Facs, edn., IOB, v. 37.

'30 By four virtuous masters, according to the libretto.

'5! Sartori 24075.

'2 A mock designation.

'33 Vescovo,   Mestre, p. 16. The strophic song La Girometta had been in wide circulation in Italy since the sixteenth century.

'4 Alm and earlier bibliographers list the work as anonymous, but it appears in Monson's work-list for Galuppi in NGDMM/2. The attribution
is credible, since Galuppi had returned from London during the preceding summer. However, a 1741 score on the same text by Francesco
Araya, a Neapolitan who was active in Russia at the time, survives in Sweden (S-Sk).

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 485

Ore This setting of the story once called The Count of Essex opened on 16 November 1743 (A). The location
was now changed to Persia. Salvi's original text had been set by M. A. Gasparini (1717/11) and revised
for Giacomelli (1736/6). Gluck set the text for performance in Milan in December 1743. Zanetti's
caricature of Giovanni Carestini (Arsace) is ascribed to the singer's appearance in this work. Carestini
sang opposite Caterina Aschieri (Statira).

A Score (1741, attributed to Araya) in S-Sk
Listed as Groppo 789; Wiel 420; Alm 958

1743/10 Meride e Selinunte Music by Pietro Chiarini
[MERIS AND SELINUNTE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1743-12-26
e Dedicated to the Ladies
Oo This production, which opened on 26 December 1743 (A),'* featured Ventura Rocchetti (Meride) and

Margherita Giacomazzi (Selinunte).'* Although the practice was common at Sant' Angelo, this seems
to be the first time a woman appeared in a male role at San Giovanni Grisostomo. Porpora's setting
of the text (1726/12) was well known.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 792; Wiel 437; Alm 961

1743/11 La finta cameriera' Music attributed to Gaetano Latilla
[THE FALSE CHAMBERMAID]
A divertimento giocoso per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Barlocci'*'
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli and some aria substitutions SORTING DATE: 1743-12-26~
& Without dedicatee
i) This Carnival revival of 1743/7, which had been given at Sant' Angelo during the preceding spring,'*

must have been given before La Fiammetta.' The title-page date is 1744. The cast now included Maria
Angela Paganini (Giocondo), Pellegrino Gaggiotti (Pancrazio), Anna Querzoli Laschi (Ersomina),
Grazia Melini (Betta), and Filippo Laschi (Don Colascione).

 The production of La finta cameriera marks the reopening of San Moise after a year and a half of musical
inactivity. During the 1742-43 cycle, in which music was absent, the theater seems to have been rented
to Medebach for comedies which newly included acrobatic interpolations by members of the Raffi
troupe.' It may also represent the first efforts of Angelo Mingotti, a significant contributor to the

'35 Also reported in the Diario ordinario, No. 4126, pp. 4f.

'86 While it was common for women to appear in male roles at Sant' Angelo, it was a significant departure for San Giovanni to adopt the practice.
7 And in NG to Gennaro Antonio Federico, with revisions by Barlocci.

'8 Groppo MS, p. 271.

' The cast definitely belongs to the 1743-44 cycle, not to the 1744-45 cycle. The production of this work has to have preceded La gara per
Ja gloria (Suppl. 5b), which is a pastiche based collectively on this work, La Fiammetta (1744/2), and Orazio (1744/4).

 Goldoni implies this in the preface to vol. xvii of his collected works (Ortolani, TO, i, 752). He suggests that Gasparo Raffi, a Roman, began
bringing his troupe to Venice in 1740. His daughter Teodora was to marry Medebach; his daughter Maddalena was to marry Giuseppe Marliani,
who aspired to become a comedian. Medebach eventually yielded to Marliani's requests and made him the Arlecchino ofa troupe which included
the two Raffis. They performed at San Moise. Goldoni mentions the appearance of the Raffi troupe during Carnival periods, but the Medebach
troupe can only have performed at San Moise when operas were not being given, i.e., in all of 1742-43, in the autumn of 1743, and selected
later years.

486 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

transplantation of the Neapolitan opera buffa,'*' to run the theater. Trading on the great popularity of

this work, San Moise made a wholesale conversion to the comic genre. The number of new works it

produced rapidly outpaced that of the better established theaters, which, one by one, followed its example.
A Scores in B-Bc (Naples, 1745); I-Fe (Rome, 1738)

Listed as Groppo 796; Wiel 443; Alm 965

1744/1 Temistocle* Music by Andrea Bernasconi et al.
[THEMISTOCLES]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
rT Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1744-01-11
& Dedicated to the Ladies
OO In this setting of Metastasio's text (liberated from the adaptation of Giovanni Boldini, which had been

used at Sant' Angelo in Pampani's Artaserse Longimano, 1737/5), the enormous respect Themistocles
enjoyed for his personal qualities enabled the Athenian general to win over his enemy Xerxes (Ventura
Rocchetti), who unexpectedly declared a truce with the Greeks. Bernasconi's work had been performed
in Padua (1740) and Lucca (1741). This revival opened on 11 January 1744 with universal applause
(A).' The original production was given in Padua on 6 June 1740. Cristoforo del Rosso sang in the
title role with Ventura Rocchetti (Serse) and Catterina Fumagalli (Aspasia).
A Scores in I-PLcon (Padua, 1740); D-B, Hs, Mbs, Wa; F-Pn (all from Munich 1754/1762)

Listed as Groppo 794; Wiel 438; Alm 963

1744/2 La Fiammetta Composer(s) unknown
[FIAMMETTA]
An opera bernesca in musica Librettist unknown"
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1744-01-15
az Without dedicatee

This popular work, situated in Bologna, featured eight characters. Fiammetta (Maria Angela Paganini)
disrupted the quiet lives of the old man Geronio (Pellegrino Gaggiotti) and his children Flaminio (Caterina
Castelli) and Filaura (Agata Sani). The notary Signor Imbroglio (Giovanni Benvenuti) was required
to sing and dance. The role of Monst Bigid (Filippo Laschi), the French tailor, was also a satirical one.
Six professional dancers were named in the libretto.

Oo La Fiammetta opened on 15 January 1744 (A). The text seems to have been derived from a spoken
comedy given in Florence in the autumn of 1743.' The publisher's date for Venice is 1743 M.V. The
work appears to have been given prior to La gara per la gloria but evidently before Orazio, which limits
its time of opening to January 1744." Fiammetta was given in Graz and Hamburg in 1745 and bore
other progeny in Copenhagen in the late 1750s.'*

'' Miggiani's Sulle tracce della troupe Mingotti reveals that the arms of the Michiel family link a series of libretti (preserved in I-Vnm)
to each other and to works produced by Mingotti (or his brother Pietro).

' Also reported in the Diario ordinario, No. 4133, p. 11.

'S The role of Fiammetta reached back through Neapolitan stage works to a reputedly Spanish origin. See, for example, the favola pastorale
called La Fiammetta d'Ibernia (Naples, 1626).

"4 Repeated in Lucca in the autumn of 1744 (see Sartori 10128, 10139).

"SS Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 460) gives 27 December 1743 as its date, perhaps froma libretto which no longer exists. He also shows that remnants
of the tale survived through the year 1900.

'6 Miggiani, Migotti, forthcoming.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 487

A Trio in US-We'*
Listed as Groppo 793; Wiel 426; Alm 957, 962

1744/3 Artaserse Music by Domenico (Domingo) Terradellas'**
[ARTAXERXES]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
i Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1744-02-06
& Dedicated to the Ladies

+68 Four previous productions of Metastasio's libretto, with music by various other composers, had been
given in Venice since 1730. Margherita Giacomazzi now sang in the title role, with Catterina Fumagalli
(Mandane), Cristoforo del Rosso (Artabano), and Ventura Rocchetti (Arbace). Artaserse opened on
6 February 1744 with universal appreciation.' It was noted in the libretto that this was the 62nd
production at San Giovanni Grisostomo since 1705. Artaserse must be the work from which a ballerina
(La Parmigiana) was exiled from the city on 15 February 1744.'%

fi Score in I-Mc, Vnm; arias in GB-LbI;'*! I-Vqs
Listed as Groppo 795; Wiel 439; Alm 964

1744/4 Orazio* Music attributed to Gaetano Latilla, Pietro Auletta, and others!
[ORAZIO]
An opera bernesca Text attributed to Antonio Palomba
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1744-02-06
oy Without dedicatee
e In this pastiche of pirates and music, the lovers Ginevra and Orazio, after escaping from Moorish

abductors, disguised themselves as the servants Giacomina (Maria Angela Paganini) and Leandro (Anna
Querzoli Laschi) and found work in the home of the maestro di cappella Lamberto (Pellegrino Gaggiotti).
Colagianni (Filippo Laschi) was an impresario in the new theater of Naples. The first and third acts
opened in Lamberto's studio, where a harpsichord was in use as the maestro demonstrated to his
pupil Lauretta (Grazia Melini) how to sing the aria A gitata navicella, which describes the vicissitudes
of the heart on the rough seas of love.'?

47 Via Monsi, said in M1505.07.F4 to be by Orlandini. The work had been given in Florence in the autumn of 1737 and in various other
locales over the next decade. See Kirkendale, Court Musicians, p. 494.

8 Terradellas (1711-51), born in Spain and educated in Naples, was on unofficial leave from a post at San Giacomo dei Spagnuoli in Rome
when this work was produced.

' Diario ordinario, No. 4144, p. 2. PV reports that this work and Orazio (1744/4) merited praise.

'S Benigna, Memorie, f. 86, entry of 15 February 1743 M.V. The troupe of Joseph Salamon appeared in three works  Meride e Selinunte
(1743/10), Temistocle (1744/1), and Artaserse (1744/3)  at San Giovanni Grisostomo in rapid succession. Benigna noted concurrently that
the ballarina romana had died. Antonia Rossi and Camilla Vennese both appeared only in this work, La finta cameriera (1743/11), and Orazio
(1744/4). Either could have been La Parmigiana.

'S! Arias published in London, c. 1747.

' Auletta's setting of 1737 was widely circulated, gathering and shedding individual numbers as it went. Alm credits the (missing) music
to Latilla (who may have played a role) and Pergolesi, but debts to Auletta are likely. See 1748/5.

'S3 (A gitata navicella was the final aria, sung by Meleagro, in Handel's Atalanta (HWV 35; London, 1736).

488

A

 1744a
 1744b

1744/5

1744/6

TI

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Orazio opened on 6 February 1744.'** Groppo maintains that itopened in the autumn of 1743 and
continued during the winter of 1744, but no confirmation of the earlier opening can be found.'** As
performed in Venice, Orazio had numerous aria substitutions. Its text had been set by Pietro Auletta
for performance in Toledo in 1737. Latilla's setting was in heavy use in Italy through 1754. As I] maestro
di cappella the text was given ina variety of other settings throughout Europe between 1750 and 1800.
Scores (1748, 1749 attributed to Auletta) in D-DIb, Wa; F-Pn

Listed as Groppo 790; Wiel 424; Alm 959

La gara per la gloria. Cf. Suppl. 5b.

Le nozze d'Ercole e d'Ebe. Cf. Suppl. 5b.

La finta schiava Music attributed to Giacomo Maccari'
[THE FALSE SLAVE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani et al.
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1744-05-13
Without dedicatee

This revival opened on 13 May 1744 (A),'*' the eve of Ascension. The text was derived from Silvani's
L'inganno innocente, long before set by Albinoni (as 1701/3). This production featured Mariano Nicolini
(Amurat), Giovanna Cesati (Fatime), Anna Castelli (Climene), and Giuseppe Gallieni (Rodrigo). The
work was performed by the Mingotti troupe in Graz and Prague in 1746.'%*

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 800; Wiel 445; Alm 969

Cesare in Egitto Music by Antonio Colombo
[CAESAR IN EGYPT]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Giacomo Fr. Bussani by Carlo Goldoni'
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1744-05-13

Dedicated to the Ladies'

In this revised version of 1735/7, Pompey hoped to retire in peace in Egypt with his wife Cornelia
(Giustina Gallo) but instead lost his life after Ptolemy (Carlo Carlani) enlisted help in defeating Cleopatra
(Bortola Gallo). Julius Caesar (Giovanni Carestini) prevailed. Cesare, which was later set by Sarti and
Piccinni, was set in Alexandria. It opened on 13 May 1744 (A).'*' Goldoni's revisions to Bussani's
well-worn libretto had been made for the San Giovanni Grisostomo setting (1735/5) by Giacomelli.
The work was shortened for this springtime production.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 799; Wiel 446; Alm 968

'S4 Diario ordinario, No. 4144, p. 2. Also reported in PV.
55 Groppo MS, pp. 270f. Wiel (Zeatri, p. 144) cites it as a work for Carnovale 1743, which to Wiel meant 1743-44.
'86 With contributions by Gluck, Lampugnani, and Vinci (NG).

'57 Also reported in the Diario ordinario, No. 4185, p. 24.

'58 Miggiani, Sulle tracce della troupe Mingotti, forthcoming.
' With revisions by Goldoni (Groppo MS, p. 272).

 Dedicated with a sonnet likening the drama to a ship which is being tossed and turned at sea.

'6! Also reported in the Diario ordinario, No. 4185, p. 24.

 1744c
1744/7

Oo-O@

1744/8

M1

op

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 489

Serenata (untitled) for the recuperation of Louis XV of France. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

Origille Music attributed to Antonio Palella'
[ORIGILE]

An opera bernesca in musica Text attributed to Antonio Palomba
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli and La contadina astuta' SORTING DATE: 1744-10-18~
Without dedicatee

The action in this story, inspired by the Chanson de Roland, is situated in a village. Its aim, according
to the libretto, is to demonstrate the correction of the vice of vain ambition.'TM The person in need
of correction is Martin/Martano (Giuseppe Ambrosini), who, pretending to be a gentleman, makes love
to the lady Origile (Anna Guadagni). She is otherwise the object of the affections of the warrior
Ranier/Raniero (Giovanna Rossi).

Origille was the first of two autumn works given at San Moise in 1744 and must therefore have opened
ata relatively early date. On the probable sequence of works there, see Don Saverio (1744/9) and Emira
(1745/1). The production was praised in the libretto for its representation and the music for its
harmony. Performed at the Teatro Nuovo in Naples in December 1740, it was one of the first opere
buffe to be given in northern Italy (Ravenna, 1742; Mantua, summer 1744). However, Groppo reported
that in Venice it met with minimal (pocchissimo) applause.'

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 802; Wiel 441; Alm 971

Madama Ciana Music by Gaetano Latilla'
[MADAME C1ana'7]
A dramma giocoso per musica Text adapted by Giovanni Barlocci'*
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With concerti SORTING DATE: 1744-11-03
Without dedicatee

In this satire on Florentine manners, Panicone (Pietro Pertici) is the father of Madame Ciana (Anna
Isola) and the proud, condescending Sfrappa (Francesco Baglioni), who represents the Order of the
Waning Moon.' The first two singers were well known as performers of comic intermezzi. This
adaptation also contained roles for two favorites of the preceding year  Orazio (Filippo Laschi) and
Fiammetta (Viviana Bosellini). The two concertos (one for oboe, one for violin), which were substituted
for balli, were intended to accompany water sports (giochi d'acque).

Madama Ciana opened on 3 November 1744 (PV). Although succeeded by La liberta nociva on 22
November, it was revived (as 1744/12) on 5 December.' The text had earlier served for an opera scenica
(Bologna, 1733). Latilla's musical setting had been presented as Don Marzio, overo L'ambizione delusa

' Palella (1698-1761) was a Neapolitan composer of both sacred and theatrical music.

' Or Livietta e Tracollo.

 The author acknowledges deriving one incident from Ariosto's Orlando furioso.
"65 Groppo MS, p. 273.
6 Groppo (MS, p. 272) and Wiel (Zeatri, p. 147), following Allacci, say the music contained contributions by Galuppi. Only Latilla is named

in the libretto.

'S7 Possibly from the Bolognese ctan, meaning swelled, as in a swelled head.

68 From a prose comedy by Simone Falconio Pratoli and Sig. Carnaccia (Groppo MS, p. 275). Emanuele Cornaggia was a Milanese performer.
He made his Venetian debut in 1745 in Lo scialaquatore alla fiera.

' Literally a Cavaliero della Luna Calante.
' Groppo MS, p. 274.

490

1744/9

i

1744/10

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

(Rome, Teatro Valle, 1738). A variant was given on the last two nights of Carnival under the title
L'ambizione delusa (Suppl. 5b). Ortolani maintains that Goldoni's La Contessina (1743/5) was indebted
to Barlocci's text.'!

For 1744-45, the seasonal subscription prices at San Cassiano were as follows: lowest tier of boxes
 28 lire, second tier  26 lire, third tier  24 lire, fourth tier and  23 lire. For scagni the prices
were normally 115 soldi per performance but double that for opening performances.'

Scores (as intermezzo) in F-Po, Pn (Paris 1753)

Listed as Groppo 801; Wiel 434; Alm 970

Don Saverio Music by Giuseppe d' Avossa'
[DON SAVERIO]

A commedia per musica Text attributed to Antonio Palomba
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Given with balli'TM SORTING DATE: 1744-11-14~
Without dedicatee

In this satire on manners, the rich Neapolitan merchant Palmiero (Nicola Setaro) loves Violante (Anna
Guadagni). Violante is really the Roman Emilia in disguise; she has come to Naples to spy on Edward
(Giovanna Rossi), her estranged lover. Edward has now fallen in love with Clarice (Anna Merichi
Ferramonti). Don Saverio (Antonia Ambrosini), the merchant's son, returns from a three-year stay in
Genoa eager to demonstrate his command of foreign manners of speech and dress.

According to the libretto, Don Saverio opened in autumn.' The date of opening given here is conjectural.
The production continued after Christmas, which suggests wide appeal but also indicates that it opened
in the later part of the autumn (i.e., St. Martin's or St. Andrew's).

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 805; Wiel 442; Alm 974

Ipermestra Music by Christoph Willibald von Gluck
[HYPERMNESTRA]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1744-11-21
Without dedicatee

Danaos (Ottavio Albuzio), the king of Argos, plotted that his daughter Hypermnestra (Vittoria Tesi
Tramontini) should murder her husband Lynceus (Lorenzo Ghirardi) on their wedding night. Through
a convoluted plot, she spared his life and was able to reconcile all the distrusting parties. Ipermestra
opened on 21 November 1744 (A).' Metastasio's text, first set by Hasse for performance in Vienna
(8 January 1744), remained in use for a century.' Later settings included those of Bertoni (San Samuele,
1748/3), Galuppi (Milan, 1758), Naumann (San Benedetto, 1774), and Astaritta (San Benedetto, 1789).

'! Ortolani, TO, x, 1265.

'? Benigna, Memorie, f. 88v.

'3 A Neapolitan, possibly of Spanish origin. Don Saverio was his first opera. He is best known for his comic opera La pupilla (Florence, 1763),
which may itself be indebted to intermezzi buffi given at San Samuele in the 1730s.

'4 Possibly also with La contadina astuta (cited only by Wiel, Teatri, p. 150).
"5 See also Groppo MS, p. 274. Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 343) and Wiel (Teatri, p. 150) list it for the autumn.
"8 Also Diario ordinario, No. 4269, p. 16.

Fora listing of subsequent productions see Stieger, Opernlexikon, i/2, 624. The story had previously been related by Ivanovich (in La costanza
trionfante, 1672/5) and Salvi (in Jpermestra, 1724/2). A pastiche involving Metastasio's text was to be given at San Samuele in 1757.

1744/11

i

rs)
o-O@@

1744/12

iI

Op

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 491

Score in GB-Lbl; arias in US-CAi, Cn
Listed as Groppo 803; Wiel 436; Alm 972

La liberta nociva Music by Rinaldo di Capua!
[A DAMAGING FREEDOM]

A dramma giocoso per musica Text adapted by Giovanni Barlocci'
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With concerti, a ballo, and a gioco SORTING DATE: 1744-11-22
Without dedicatee

Another work in the bernesca tradition, La liberta opens with Dorimene (Eugenia Mellini Fanti) disguised
as the pilgrim Costanzo, who sits by the bank of the Tiber lamenting the infidelity of his mistress;
Dorimene's real love is Flavio, a gentleman from Ancona. Other key roles were those of the German
Baron Zuffre (Francesco Baglioni) and his servant Dirindina (Viviana Bossellini).' The production
opened on 22 November 1744.'*! The original one had taken place in Rome in 1740. Act Three was
terminated by a mock festa di ballo and gioco, which took place in a salon illuminated for the final
scene. The work was replaced by a revival of Madama Ciana (1744/12) on 5 December, suggesting
that it was not well received. Similarly, the concertos for oboe and violin performed at the ends of Acts
One and Two found little favor.'

No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 804; Wiel 433; Alm 973

L'ambizione delusa Music by Rinaldo di Capua'
[AMBITION DELUDED]

A dramma giocoso per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Barlocci'*
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Given with concerti SORTING DATE: 1744-12-05
Without dedicatee

The revival of Madama Ciana (1744/8) on 5 December 1744 appears to have taken this title, which
corresponded to its original alternative title (Rome, 1738). La liberta nociva, which had succeeded it
in the St. Martin's period, was quickly replaced by a revival of Madama Ciana. Groppo gives the
impression that the revival was distinct from the reprise of L ambizione delusa, after La forza d'amore,
for the last nights of Carnival 1745 (Suppl. 5b). A practical way to make the work seem different would
have been to revert to the original title. The libretto identifies it as being a work for Carnival 1745.
No musical sources known

Listed as Wiel 435, Groppo 807, Alm 976

''8 Revisions attributed to Baldassare Galuppi (Groppo MS, p. 273). Rinaldo di Capua and Latilla both offered several works in Venice which
had earlier been given at the Teatro della Valle.

' From a prose comedy by Simone Falconio Pratoli and Sig. Carnaccia (see Groppo MS, p. 275).

 Dirindina was the name of a principal in a much earlier intermezzo.

'8! Diario ordinario, No. 4269, p. 16. The original production was at the Teatro della Valle, Rome, in 1740.
' Groppo MS, p. 274.

8: The oboe concerto depicted the sunrise. The violin concerto depicted the palace of Apollo. Their description makes them sound closer to
programmatic ballets than to virtuoso works. Their poor reception is noted by Groppo (Joc. cit.)

' With additions by Galuppi, according to Wiel (Teatri, 147), although he is not acknowledged in the libretto.

'85 Derived from a prose text by Simone Falconio Pratoli.

492

1744/13

r1

&
XC)

1744/14

i

is)
COe

i

 1744a

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Semiramide riconosciuta Music by Johann Adolf Hasse'*
[SEMIRAMIS RECOGNIZED]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1744-12-26

Dedicated to Robert, Viscount d'Arcy, Earl of Holderness'*'

To Venetian audiences, the subject of Semiramis was familiar from the earlier works set by Pollarolo

(1714/1), Porpora (1729/4), and Jommelli (1742/8).'** This production reiterated favorite scenes of

theater audiences generally  great palaces, ships at sea, military encampments, disguises, and the

sun-worship of Zoroastrians. An addendum to the argomento underscored the great fame of the librettist.

It appears that a text of such grandeur was thought especially suitable for the dedicatee. The Venetian

production of this work, which had also run in Naples from 4 November, opened on 27 December 1744

(A).' The work was so well received that the run of its successor, Antigono (1745/3), was abruptly

terminated to reinstate it.'" Vittoria Tesi Tramontini sang in the title role with Giovanni Carestini

(Scitalice), Lorenzo Ghirardi (Mirteo), and Girolama Giacometti (Jamiri). The scenery was by Romualdo

Mauro.

Scores from the Dresden 1747 production in B-Bc; D-Dlb; G-Lbl; from the Warsaw 1760 production
in B-Bc, Br; D-Dlb, Lemi, W; F-Pn; I-Bc, Vc, VIRE (autograph, 1750);'! S-Skma; US-We; arias
in I-Be

Listed as Groppo 806; Wiel 454; Alm 975

La finta cameriera Music adapted from Gaetano Latilla by Baldassare Galuppi
[THE FALSE CHAMBERMAID]

A dramma giocoso per musica Text adapted by Giovanni Barlocci and others'
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With concerti at the end of Acts I and II SORTING DATE: 1744-12-26~
Without dedicatee

The cast for this third, slightly altered, production of La finta cameriera in little more than eighteen
months. included Eugenia Mellini Fanti (Giocondo), Pietro Pertici'' (Pancrazio), and Anna Querzoli
Laschi (Erosmina), now with Filippo Laschi (Moschino) and Francesco Baglioni restored to the role
of Don Colascione. The concerti offered background music for views of the sea. Its earlier productions
were 1743/7 and 1743/11.

Scores in B-Be (Naples, 1745); I-Fe (Rome 1738)

Listed as Groppo 811; Wiel 451; Alm 980

Le metamorfosi odiamorose in Birba trionfale. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

'86 Hasse was on leave from the court at Dresden.

'87 The earl of Holderness (1718-78) was co-producer of Handel's last opera, Deidamia (HWV 42, 1741; see Gibson, Royal Academy, p. 32).
He arrived in Venice as English ambassador extraordinary on 17 October 1744 (Benigna, Memorie, entry of 17 ottobre 1744, f. 88; also
the Diario ordinario, No. 4255, p. 2). He and his wife had traveled by way of Vienna, where they attended name-day festivities for Duke Francis
Stephen on 4 October (Grossegger, Theater, p. 34). His public entry occurred on 20 February 1745 (A). In that month Gasparo Gozzi dedicated
a collection of poems to him.

'88 Porpora's setting was of Metastasio's text. Pollarolo and Jommelli had set Silvani's text.
' Also Diario ordinario, No. 4285, p. 2.

' Groppo MS, p. 276.

'" Autograph (I-Vire, N. 326) cited in Mamy, Revisions, p. 259.

' Groppo (MS, p. 276) credits revisions for this production to [Emanuele] Carnaccia.

8 Pertici was from the intermezzo circuit.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 493

1745/1 Emira Pastiche, possibly derived from Leonardo Leo
[EmMiRA]
An opera bernesca Librettist unknown
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Given with Serpina e Uberto;!TM a ballo SORTING DATE: 1745-01-16~
& Without dedicatee

CO Enmira playfully described the love of the heroine (Anna Guadagni, who was required to dance) for
Celindo (Giuseppe Guadagni), and of her brother Leandro (Nicola Setaro) for Eugenia (Anna Merichi
Ferramonti).'* Similarities in cast structure link Emira with Origille (1744/7) and Don Saverio (1744/9),
placing all three in one continuum from autumn 1744 through mid-Carnival 1745.' Emira must have
opened early in Carnival (which began officially on 9 January) but after the substantial run of the well-
received Don Saverio. When, after several recitations, the singers found no applause for their
improvisations, they left Venice in desperation, after which the theater was closed.' However,
the text was recycled, in one case being set by Gioacchino Cocchi (San Salvatore, Ascension 1756).

A No musical sources known!'
Listed as Groppo 808; Wiel 458;' Alm 977

1745/2 La forza d'amore Music by Baldassare Galuppi?
[THE POWER OF LOVE]
A dramma giocoso per musica Text attributed to Demetrio Panicelli?'
rr Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With concerti SORTING DATE: 1745-01-30
H Without dedicatee
oLORG) In the plot, two eligible Venetian young women reject potential suitors to act out time-warped fantasies

about male vocations. Talestri (Eugenia Mellini Fanti) imagines herself to be a medieval knight, while
Doralice (Anna Isola) fancies herself a renaissance poet. Some of Manfredonio's arias may have been
modified by Francesco Baglioni, who sang in that role. La forza d'amore opened on 30 January 1745
(A).? As in the two works most recently given at San Cassiano, the first two acts concluded with
concertos. The first accompanied the depiction of water games (giochi d'acque); the second tableau
again took Apollo's palace as its backdrop. According to Groppo, Abbot Panicelli was displeased with
the work and had kept it out of circulation for some years.

' Cited (as La serva padrona) in Groppo MS, p. 275.

'5 A dramma per musica of the same title had been set by Leonardo Leo for performance in Naples (1732, 1735) and by G. B. Marchi for
performance in Milan (1737), but the roles of the earlier works were different.

6 These were the only three works given in Venice in which five of the six members of the cast  Nicola Setari (not Letari, as Wiel gives
in Teatri, p. 156), Anna Guadagni, Anna Merichi Ferramonti, Nicoletta Petina, and Giuseppe Ambrosini  appeared. Giuseppe Guadagni,
who did not appear in Origille, made an appearance during the Ascension season of 1751 at Sant' Angelo. Given the bounds of the economic
year and the knowledge that Emira was the last work given in the winter of 1745 at San Moise, the sequence of all three is reasonably clear,
even if the exact dates remain fuzzy.

'%7 Dopo varie recite di questo drama li aignori cantanti vedendo di no haver incontrato niun applauso a l'improviso si sono disperatamente
partiti da Venezia, e resto il teatro chiuso (Groppo MS, p. 275).

8 It is Leo's work which is found in D-MUs; I-Mb, Ne.
'% 458 is printed as 358 (Wiel, Teatri, p. 156).
2 At this time maestro del coro at the Ospedale de' Mendicanti.

! An abbot known as a minor poet of the time. His works were published in Venice. Groppo (MS, p. 275) claims that he so much regretted
having written it that he was distraught for years afterwards.

202 See Heartz, Vis comica, p. 36.

 Also Diario ordinario, No. 4299, p. 8 (the weekly entry in which this reference occurs is erroneously dated 6 Gennaro, although its position
within the printed series indicates that 6 Febbraro must have been intended).

494

1745/3

CO

fi

 1745a
 1745b

1745/4

rm

&o
Oo

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 809; Wiel 452; Alm 978

Antigono Music by Andrea BernasconiTMTM
[ANTIGONOS]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1745-02-13

Dedicated to Count Giacomo San Vitale

In Metastasio's version of the story, the Macedonian king Antigonos fell in love with the Egyptian
princess Berenice and arranged to marry her. On the day of the wedding a violent mutual passion overtook
his son Demetrios and the intended bride. It was because of Antigonos's infatuation, according to this
account, that Alexander was able to invade Macedonia.

Antigono opened on 13 February 1745 (A). In the Venetian production, Ottavio Albuzio sang in the
lead role, with Vittoria Tesi Tramontini (Berenice), Giovanni Carestini (Demetrio), and Lorenzo Girardi
(Alessandro). Despite the celebrated credentials of the librettist, the work was so poorly received that
the production was terminated after a few performances and Semiramide was revived. Nonetheless,
Antigono was remounted in Treviso in 1752. Metastasio's text, first set by Hasse for performance at
Hubertusburg (near Dresden) on 10 October 1743, remained in use through 1860.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 810; Wiel 455; Alm 979

Celebration for the Public Entry of the British ambassador. Cf. Suppl. 5a.

L'ambizione delusa. Cf. Suppl. 5b.

Nicoraste, re di Tracia Music by Giovanni Battista Pattoni2
[NICORASTES, KING OF THRACE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With Serpina e Uberto;?TM balli SORTING DATE: 1745-05-22

Dedicated to Sua Eccellenza Nomen NescioTM

After the death of the Thracian king Rhoemetalces/Remetalce, his more mountainous lands were given
to his brother, Rhascuporis/Rescupori, and his more fertile ones to his son, Cotys.? Here the affairs
discussed are those of Cotys's son Gandartes (Giuseppe Jozzi), during whose era the kingdom fell under
the rule of Nicorastes (Giuseppe Giacchi). The final scene presented a regal view in Byzantium. Nicoraste
opened on 22 May 1745 (A), the date of dedication of the libretto." It ran for two weeks, during which

204 At this time maestro del coro at the Ospedale della Pieta.
205 Groppo MS, p. 276.

26 Pattoni was from Mantua.

207 This seems to be the only work given at Sant'Angelo in 1745 with which the intermezzo La serva padrona could have been linked.

208 His (Her) Excellency Name Unavailable, a common way of protecting a patron traveling under an assumed identity (incognito).

2 Thrace, which lay north of the Aegean Sea and west of the Black Sea, was roughly coincident with modern-day Bulgaria.

210 Also Diario ordinario, No. 4348, p. 2. Ascension was celebrated on the 27th.

1745/5

ry

a)
Te)

1745/6

im

ra)
@

A

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 495

time changes were made to Acts One and Two."' The text was reset by Sacchini for performance at
San Benedetto, Venice, in 1769.7

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 813; Wiel 459; Alm 982

L'Olimpiade Music by Ignazio Fiorillo
[THE OLYMPIAD]

A dramma per musica Text adapted anonymously from Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1745-05-22
Without dedicatee

This popular story had formed the subject of previous works by Vivaldi (1734/4) and Pergolesi/Hasse
(1738/6). In this version the work was shortened and the role of Alcandro eliminated. The cast included
Domenico Bonifacci (Clistene) and Maria Venturini (Aristea). L 'Olimpiade opened on 22 May 1745
(A),'" the Saturday before Ascension, and ran for two weeks. According to Groppo, the aria in Act
2, Scene 7, accompanied on the oboe and bassoon by the Besuzzi brothers, was a show-stopper. While
his report that the applause was universal echoes the account found in Pallade veneta, his continuation
that the bassoon carried the major part of it?'* contained his own observation.

Score in D-W

Listed as Groppo 812; Wiel 457; Alm 981

Lo scialaquatore alla fiera Music by Giuseppe Orlandini et al.
[THE SQUANDERER AT THE FAIR]

A dramma giocoso Text attributed to Ambrosio Borghese?!*
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Summer (Assumption)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1745-10-04
Without dedicatee

Lo scialacquatore is a satire on the Ascension fair. The opening scene features a piazza in Venice
[with] a view of shops displaying merchandise. Rosaura (Elisabetta Ronchetti), the daughter of Pancrazio
(Alessandro Cattani), loves Flavio (Emanuele Cornaggia), who is disguised as Delfina. Her brother
Don Pasquale (Carlo Paganini) loves the real Delfina (Maria Angela Paganini), a comedienne, but marries
Lindora (Rosa Tagliavini). The first Venetian production of Lo scialaquatore opened on 4 October
1745 (A),?' when it enjoyed full applause (PV). It was so popular that it was revived after / rigiri
delle cantarini (1745/8) on 26 December." Only eleven of the original twenty-six arias were retained
from Florence, where the work had had its first performance on 14 September 1744.

No known scores
Listed as Groppo 814; Wiel 447; Alm 983

2!' See the annotated copy of Groppo's Catalogo (1-Vnm Dramm. 3764), hereafter cited as Groppo's addendum. Catalogue numbers after
811 are all manuscript insertions in this source. Although the pages with added listings are unnumbered, page numbers can be deduced in
relation to the printed pages that precede them.

?!2 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i/2, 862.

213 A|so Diario ordinario, No. 4348, p. 2. The fair of Ascension started earlier than usual in 1745 (the 22nd was a Saturday) to avoid an eventual
conflict with the feast of San Antonio. Being limited to two weeks, it closed just ahead of the triduo of Pentecost. The underlying avviso is
dated on a Friday (28 May).

2\4 Groppo MS, p. 276. The Besuzzi brothers, Alessandro and Girolamo, were both in the service of the king of Sardinia.

?!5 Except by Wiel (Zeatri, p. 152), who credits Bartolomeo Vitturi. But see the commentary for La fata meravigliosa (1746/4). Borghese was

Florentine.

216 Also in the Diario Ordinario, No. 4404, p. 9, and in PV.
27 Groppo MS, p. 278.

496 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1745/7 Il Pandolfo Music by Giuseppe Scolari!

[PANDOLFO]

A commedia per musica Text adapted by Giovanni Barlocci??
i Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Summer (Assumption)

Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1745-10-05~
& Without dedicatee
60 In this significantly simplified version of L ambizione delusa (1744/12) the number ofroles is reduced

to five. Of these only three (Pandolfo, Lucinda, Fiorlindo) are common to both. New roles for Celio
and Nico are introduced. New verses have been added to Goldoni's text in Scenes 5, 6, and 26. Pandolfo,
who had enjoyed a role in Hasse's intermezzi Lucilla e Pandolfo, was to re-appear in an anonymous
La finta pazza (1747/7)! and countless later works. Opening at San Samuele on 5 October in 1745,
Pandolfo seems to have been its showcase piece for the autumn season. Groppo says that Pandolfo
was given by the comici of San Samuele with singular applause, both for the music and for the cast.?
The cast of comedians was not identified in the libretto.
A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 816; Wiel 456; Alm 985, 986

1745/8 I rigiri delle cantarine Music by Francesco Maggiore
(THE TRICKS OF SINGERS]
A dramma giocoso per musica Text by Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1745-11-26
ra) Dedicated to Sua Eccellenza Nomen Nescio
 In this satire on opera companies, Olimpia (Elisabetta Ronchetti) and Ersina (Maria Angela Paganini)

are singers, Fulvio (Carlo Paganini) an impresario, Tarquinio (Alessandro Cattani) a maestro di musica,
and Fabio (Margherita Cavalli) a copyist. Ridolfo (Francesco Amorevoli) loves Olimpia but marries
Berenice (Rosa Tagliavini), the previous mistress of Lelio (Emanuele Cornaggia), who is disguised
as Sigismondo. J rigiri opened on 26 November 1745, when it pleased many (PV). The pleasure may
not have been long-lived, for a revival of Lo scialaquatore (1745/6) opened on 26 December.*

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 817; Wiel 448; Alm 987

2!8 Scolari was from Vicenza; this was his first work for the stage. He was later active in Barcelona and Lisbon. Mamczarz (Intermedees, p.
449) attributes the music for this work to Hasse, who had composed music for intermezzi of the same name, but Scolari's name is in the libretto
(Sartori Nos. 17744, 17745).

2!9 See comments for L ambizione delusa (1744/12). In her listing for it, Alm (Catalog, p. 623), citing the Groppo MS, credits the libretto to
Barlocci.

220 A note to the courteous reader (Groppo MS, p. 278) describes this as a reduction to five characters of La commedia in commedia, which
was a prose comedy by Cosimo Antonio Pelli. Alm (Catalog, p. 630) lists the libretto for Pandolfo as anonymous.

2! The comic intermezzi (Lucilla e Pandolfo) of 1739 contained only the two named roles. It is unclear whether the revival of l'intermezzo
intitolato II Pandolfo given at San Giovanni Grisostomo in the autumn of 1754 (Groppo MS, pp. 308f) was this work or its prior incarnation.

22 Diario ordinario, No. 4404, p. 9. The libretto has a title-page date of 1745 and a printer's date of MDCCXLVI.

223 Groppo (MS, p. 278) reports that Questo dramma overo sia comedia fu recitato da comici con singolar applauso si per la musica, che per
PP P. p
gli attori.

224 A Neapolitan maestro, Maggiore (c. 1715 -c. 1782) was active in various parts of the Veneto and had in recent years worked as an impresario
in Gorizia. His personal life was a subject of gossip, particularly in 1739, when he left his wife and two children in Naples to take up with
a voice student named Cecia (see Pier Leone Ghezzi in I-Rvat Ott. Lat. 3117, f. 36, caricature of 30 Maggio 1739).

5 Groppo MS, p. 278.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 497

1745/9 Ariodante Music by Georg Christoph Wagenseil?*
[ARIODANTE]
A dramma per musica Text adapted anonymously from Antonio Salvi
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1745-11-26
& Dedicated to John Hobart?
 Pollarolo's setting of Salvi's text (1716/8; revived as 1718/9) was greatly celebrated in its time. Handel's

setting (HWV 33) opened at Covent Garden, London, on 8 January 1735, and could have been known
to the dedicatee. Wagenseil's version was significantly reduced from earlier ones. The cast included
Filippo Elisi (Ariodante), Giacinto Cestini (Dalinda), and Ottavio Albuzio (Donaldo). Catterina Ascheri
sang in the role of Ginevra, which, in Pollarolo's setting of 1716, had brought instant fame to Faustina
Bordoni. The story was revived in Simone Mayr's setting ofa text by Gaetano Rossi (Ginevra di Scozia),
which was given for the inauguration of the Teatro Nuovo, Trieste, in 1801.7

 Ariodante, Wagenseil's first opera, opened on 26 November 1745 (A). The composer was present for
the production. The time-slot would have suited Wagenseil's stature as a relative novice, for he was
both a novice and a foreigner. An invitation to compose the work may have been related to the fact
that the new resident of his employer, Maria Theresia, the queen of Hungary and Bohemia, had presented
his credentials to the Venetian government during the last week of October. The same diplomat was
also to serve as imperial ambassador to Venice.

Oe The libretto included a complaint that the work in its present form had been cut, adapted, and given
new aria texts to accommodate new music, and that music in Italy was now abused everywhere, since
anyone had the authority to change whatever he wished, even the title.?" These defects may have been
remedied when the work was given in Vienna (15 May 1746).

fi Score in A-Wn (facs. in IOB, 73)

Listed as Groppo 815; Wiel 453; Alm 984

1745/10 Sofonisba* Music by Niccole Jommelli
[SOPHONISBA]
A dramma per musica Text by Anton Maria and Girolamo Zanetti?
i Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1745-12-26
& Without dedicatee
 The Carthaginian heroine Sophonisba (Catterina Aschieri), a niece of Hannibal, was betrothed to

the Numidian king Massanissa (Filippo Elisi). Syphax (Niccole La Reginella) usurped the king's rights,
driving Massanissa mad. Scipio (Ottavio Albuzio) was instrumental in redressing these wrongs. The
eventual wedding of Sophonisba and Massanissa was depicted with a mixture of Greek and barbaric

6 This work represented the Venetian debut of Wagenseil (1715-77), who had once been the keyboard teacher of Maria Theresia.

7 Hobart (1693-1756) was about to be named first earl of Buckinghamshire on the strength of the liaison between his sister, the countess
of Suffolk, and King George II. Currently serving as British ambassador extraordinary, he arrived in Venice on 17 October 1744 (Diario ordinario,
No. 4255, p. 2 ) and made his public entry on 16 January 1745 (Diario ordinario, No. 4291, p. 2).

28 Among the differences in Rossi's account is the fact that the action takes place in St. Andrew's (Scotland) rather than Edinburgh.
229 Vas, Misc. di Atti Diversi, Filza 58/I, avviso (Donado and Desideri) of 30 Ottobre 1745.

230 The libretto had been presented in Sellitti's setting under the title Ginevra (1733/5).

23! See Grossegger, Theater, p. 49.

282 According to Wiel (Jeatri, p. 158), this account was unrelated to Silvani's like-named work set by Caldara (1708/8). The thrust of the story
is different, but the roles are similar.

233 Also the daughter of Hasdrubal.

498 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

religious practices. This second drama opened on 26 December 1745. The title-page is dated 1746.
An untitled libretto for its balli was separately published. This was Jommelli's first appearance in Venice
since 1741.

A Score in I-Rp
Listed as Groppo 818; Wiel 462; Alm 988

1745/11 Orlando fi urioso Composer(s) uncertain
[ROLAND THE DEMENTED]
A dramma per musica Libretto adapted anonymously from Grazio Braccioli
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With La vedova ingegnosa e Tabarano* SORTING DATE: 1745-12-26~
a Without dedicatee
Oe The text was revised from that of Braccioli (1713/5) but was now described as a dramma giocondo.

The scenes resemble those of Vivaldi's setting (1714/5) but are more vividly described. The cast included
Felice Novelli (Or/ando), Regina Gonzales (Angelica), Anna Bastiglia (Medoro), and Angelica Saitz
(Alcina). The libretto for this version of Orlando was the first to be doubly dated (e.g., as 1745/6 M.V.).
It could have opened in late December 1745, although an opening in early January 1746 is also possible.
- While the opera had a long past, the intermezzi had a robust future. Under a variety of titles (e.g., //
medico ignorante burlato dalla vedova di spirito, et al.) and ever-changing casts, the intermezzi were
performed in Dresden and Prague, 1747; Rome, 1749; Florence, 1752; Graz, 1754; and Vienna, 1766.7
A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 819; Wiel 468; Alm 989

1746/1 La vedova accorta' Music by Ferdinando Bertoni et al.2"7
[THE WARY WIDOW]
A dramma giocoso per musica Text attributed to Ambrosio Borghese
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1746-01-15~
& Dedicated to Gentlewomen

In this comedy, first given in Florence in 1745, Maria Angela Paganini took the role of Lisetta, a widow
who serves as governess to the sisters Rosaura (Elisabetta Ronchetti) and Isabella (Rosa Tagliavini).
Their brother Filiberto fancies a rich husband for one of them and has arranged for Giorgione (Carlo
Paganini) to meet them. Other potential suitors include Monsiti la Mode (Alessandro Cattani) and the
humble Ernesto (Emanuele Cornaggia).** The action takes place in Padua. The dedication of the libretto
speaks somewhat apologetically about the humorous (scherzevoli) representations of this year and asks
ladies of heroic soul not to despair, nor to believe that the values they cherish have been abandoned.*

24 Diario ordinario, No. 4441, p. 3.
25 First given as Don Tabarano (Groppo MS, p. 279), an alternative title for Scintilla e Tabarano. Cf. Suppl. 4a.
236 Cf, Sartori 24421 through 24429. The Roman performance featured Pietro Gori (Drusilla), with Gio. Battista Persichino (Strambone).

257 Some arias were pre-existing (Groppo MS, p. 279). The recitatives and starred arias were by Bertoni (1725-1813), who came from Sald
and was to become a dominating presence in Venetian musical life over the second half of the century.

238 Ta vedova accorta has a total of eight roles, only four of which are listed in Wiel (Zeatri, p. 153).

23 Che se per grande sventura, questa non dispreggievole impresa il bramato glorioso effetto intieramente non consegui, s'e non per tanto
con ogni studio fin or procurato, ed in presente, diligenza veruna non si risparmia per ottenerlo, non senza qualche speranza, che dall'eroico
vostr'animo, con benigno gradimento |' essequiosissimo desiderio di tenervi ricreate venga distinto. Non negate adunque, a titolo di generoso
grazia qualche parte dell' autorevole venerata prottezione vostra al presente libretto, poiche nel rendere questo si fortunato, gloriosissimo pur
renderete I'inalterabile ossequio....

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 499

oo Given that Lo scialaquatore had a revival starting on 26 December 1745, the printer's date of 1746
must indicate the correct year for this work, notwithstanding the title-page designation Carnovale 1745.
Considering the parameters of the season and the fact that La fata meravigliosa (1746/4) was to open
on 8 February, it seems likely that this work would have opened shortly after the official start of Carnival
(10 January). At the time La vedova was given, it was oddly symbiotic with the intermezzi La vedova
ingegnosa (the intermezzi given with Orlando furioso, 1745/11).

A Excerpts in F-Pn
Listed as Groppo 820; Wiel 450; Alm 990

1746/2 Armida abbandonata* Music by Andrea Adolfati et al."
[ARMIDE ABANDONED]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Francesco Silvani?
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With Livietta e Tracollo and/or II vecchio pazzo in amore SORTING DATE: 1746-01-22~
& Without dedicatee
 Silvani's libretto had been set several times previously for Venetian stages, starting with the work of

Ruggieri (1707/9). This version may have foreshadowed the production given in Bologna in 1758. The
printer's date is 1746. Sartori (2732) dates it 1745. The relatively large cast (reckoned by the standards
of San Moise) and use of popular intermezzi suggest a work for the height of Carnival.

y-39 The scenery, described in extensive comment in the libretto, was by Giovanni Battista Moretti, who
is identified as a Venetian professor. The opening scene, depicting the cave of the wizard Philomachus,
featured collections of sea shells, books, globes, and mathematical instruments. His magic was said
to be based on natural phenomena. The cast included Angelica Saitz (Armida), Regina Gonzales
(Tancredi), and Anna Bastiglia (Rinaldo). An unidentified singer took the role of Philomachus.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 822; Wiel 469; Alm 992

1746/3 Artaserse Music by Girolamo Abbos*
[ARTAXERXES]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio
i" Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1746-01-28~
& Without dedicatee
 Five productions based on Metastasio's text had previously been given in Venice as 1730/7 (Hasse),

1734/3 (also Hasse), 1737/5 (Pampani), 1742/5 (Paganelli), and 1744/3 (Terradellas). In this production
Filippo Elisi sang in the title role, with Catterina Aschieri as Mandane. The window of time during
which this production could have taken place is confined to the later portion of Carnival in 1746,
confirming Stieger's inference that the work opened in January of that year. It could, however, have
opened a week or so later than estimated here.

24 See Groppo MS, p. 279.

>" 4 considerable portion of the text included in the libretto was marked for exclusion in the musical performance. The recitatives, choruses,
and some arias were by Andrea Adolfati (1711-62), who worked as maestro di cappella at Santa Maria della Salute. Buini was credited with
the music (probably meaning the arias) in a manuscript note in the libretto in I-Bc.

2 Sven Hansell and Carlida Stefan (while noting that Metastasio abhorred Adolfati's music) give Metastasio as the poet in NGDMM/2, but
Silvani's name appears in the libretto.

243 Wiel (Teatri, p. 161) supplies the former. On the latter see the Groppo MS, p. 280.
244 4 Maltese composer who died in Naples (c. 1715-60), his name could also be rendered as Abos, Abosso, Avosso, etc.

4 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 108.

500

1746/4

im

CO Bo

1746/5

mM

a
OOO en

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 821; Wiel 463; Alm 991

La fata meravigliosa' Music by Giuseppe Scolari
[THE MARVELOUS FAIRY]

A dramma giocoso Text provisionally attributed to Ambrosio BorgheseTM*
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1746-02-08
Without dedicatee

Carmenta (Maria Angela Paganini), the Marvelous Fairy, lived on a mythical island ruled by Asmiro
(Emanuele Cornaggia), who was transformed by turns into a stag and a shepherd. Through her magic
she could transform herself into many creatures and could change the land, turning caves into ports,
and so forth. At the end of the work she revealed herself among the clouds.

This production opened on 8 February 1746. The printer's date is 1746, although the title-page date
(obviously erroneous) is 1745. A role for anew character (personaggio) was added.** The work opened
with shepherds performing a short concerto on various unidentified instruments. In the Act-One scene
containing a ballo, an orca surfaced from the deep sea and, after spitting out an important actor,
transformed itself into a magnificent sea shell. It was on this shell that the fairy and eight dancers,
representing the marine deities, offered the ballo. The work was given in Vienna on 29 September 1748,
when it was applauded for its scenery and machines.

No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 823; Wiel 449; Alm 993

Armida al campo Music by multiple composers
[ARMIDE IN CAMP]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli and combattimenti SORTING DATE: 1746-05-18
Without dedicatee

The original version of this story* was first set for Venice by Ruggieri as 1707/9. This pastiche version
for the Ascension season is likely to have opened on 18 May 1746. The work opened in a Turkish
graveyard outside Jerusalem, where Armide (Angelica Saiz) arrived in a carriage pulled through the
air by dragons. The baili that ended the first two acts depicted Turks and Franks respectively.*' Horses,
camels, and elephants were seen in Geoffrey's camp at the end of the work. The cast included Giuseppe
Nicola d'Albertis (Goffredo), Emanuele Cornaggia (Rinaldo), and Teresa Castelli (Clorinda).

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 825; Wiel 465; Alm 995

4 The libretto is anonymous but the tone of the dedication, which speaks of I'ultimo esperimento del mio profondissimo ossequio nella
rappresentazione del presente giocoso componimento, seems similar to that of La vedova accorta, the immediately preceding work at San
Cassiano. This could indicate common authorship, although it may only be that the dedications were written by the same impresario.

47 Diario ordinario, No. 4459, p. 2, giving the title as La fata prodigiosa.

>48 Groppo (MS, p. 280) says this was for the final twelve performances, but given that the final one should have been on the 19th, it appears
that there would have been a maximum of twelve performances. Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 430) claims a performance at the Burg-Theater,
Vienna, in September [1745], but the Burg-Theater, a small house of rococo taste replacing the older Hoftheater (1700-47), designed by Galli-
Bibiena and dismantled under orders from Maria Theresia, did not open until 1748.

4 Grossegger, Theater, p. 81.

250 Armida abbandonata, according to the note to the discrete spectator.

25! A separate libretto for an azion militare to be performed by seven able young women [the nymphs accompanying the Franks] was published.

1746/6

1746/7

A

 1746a
 1746b

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 501

La Sacendiera Music anonymous
[THE HOUSEKEEPER??]

A dramma giocoso Librettist unknown
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1746-05-18
Without dedicatee

In this comic work of uncertain authorship, set in Leghorn, Filauro (Nicola Gotti) is believed to have
died but poses under the name of Lucindo to find out what relationships his widow Elisa [singer
unidentified] may be cultivating. Elisa's housekeeper Checchina (Maria Angela Paganini) is being courted
by two common prospects  the avaricious Baldone (Carlo Paganini) and the impoverished count Don
Scialappa (Alessandro Cattani). An untitled libretto for the balli was published separately. The production
is likely to have opened on 18 May 1746. La facendiera had a revival at Turin in 1751.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 826; Wiel 470; Alm 996

Orazio [e] Curiazio Music by Ferdinando Bertoni
[THE HORATIANS AND THE CURIATIANS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Simeone Antonio Sografi*
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1746-05-18~
Dedicated to the Ladies

Although the ancient Roman Horatians (orazi) warred with the Alban Curiatians (curiazi), they were
linked by marriage: Marco Orazio was the husband of Sabina Curiazio, whose loyalties were torn. Here
the Curiazi have a newly invented sister, Camilla (Giacinta Forcellini), who is loved by Orazio (Giovanni
Tedeschi), and another conjugal link is planned. For her protection, she is disguised as a man.
Orazio is likely to have opened on 18 May 1746. An untitled libretto for its balli was published separately.
The orchestra is likely to have included the violinist Giacomo Casanova, who was employed at San
Samuele between 1746 and 1748. The outlines of the plot, based on Pierre Corneille's Horace (1640),
may have been conveyed through Vincenzo Grimani's libretto for G. F. Tosi (1688/5). Some of the
names and details were changed in Sografi's text as set by Cimarosa (Venice, La Fenice, 26 December
1796; further revised for J.-J. Imbault, Paris, 1802). Salieri's Les Horaces (Vienna, 1786) was another
derivative of the same plot. Gli orazi ed i curiazi was Bertoni's best received opera seria.

Score in I-Vnm (Rome, 1746);?* aria in I-Ve

Listed as Groppo 824; Wiel 471; Alm 994

Lo starnuto d'Ercole. Cf. Suppl. 5c.

Eurimedonte e Timocleone. Cf. Suppl. 5c.

252 The term facendiera has several possible translations, none of them exact, nor impossible designations for Checchina. It designates a person
(here female) who looks after affairs (thus in some contexts a secretary), sometimes a bit too vigorously (in which case a busybody).

253 Probably from Padua and likely to have been a forebear of the librettist Simeone Antonio Sografi (1759-1818).

254 The Alm catalogue, following NG, attributes the libretto to Antonio Simeone Sografi. Taddeo Wiel's note of 24 July 1889 in I-Vnm, Cod.
It. IV-254-256 ( = 9825-9827) states that this source contains the work as given at the Teatro delle Dame, Rome (Carnival 1746). In that case,
however, the libretto should be by Lucando. (The title-page of this manuscript had, prior to Wiel's time, been defaced to read 1736...Benedetto
Marcello, but the work seems to have had nothing to do with Marcello. See Selfridge-Field, Marcello, p. 258.)

502

1746/8

im

fs)
OOo

1746/9

im

OR

A

 1746c
1746/10

i

ra)
Oo

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Cesare in Egitto Music attributed to Antonio Colombo?*
[CAESAR IN EGYPT]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Giacomo Fr. Bussani by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Summer (Assumption)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1746-10-08
Without dedicatee

This production of Goldoni's rewrite (1735/7) of Bussani's text (1676/6) was essentially the same as
that presented at San Samuele as 1744/6, but the casting was entirely changed and the balli were omitted.
When the work opened, on 8 October 1746 (PV), it elicited full appreciation (pieno aggradimento).
It seems unlikely to have had a long run, for Venice experienced floods in the later part of October
1746. The cast now included Sebastiano Emiliani (Giulio Cesare), Geltruda Giorgi (Cornelia), Annonciata
Scarabelli (Cleopatra), Domenico Negri (Zolomeo), and Gaetano Guadagni (Achilla). The same cast
took the work to Treviso immediately after the Venetian run was concluded.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 827; Wiel 467; Alm 997

Zenobia Music by Girolamo Michelli?
[ZENOBIA]

A dramma per musica Text adapted anonymously from Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With Ginestra e Lichetto** SORTING DATE: 1746-10-22~
Without dedicatee

Sbacci's setting of Metastasio's popular text had first been given as 1740/5. Caterina Bassi Negri now
sang in the title role. Like other members of the cast (Barbara Narici, Annina Narici, and Domenico
Negri), she was from Bologna. As the work opened, Rhadamisthos was sleeping under a rock. The
only basis for dating this work is by the process of elimination, which indicates its slight importance.
No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 832; Wiel 466; Alm 1002

Il gran Tamerlano vincitor di Bajazet. Cf. Supp. 4b.

Alcibiade Music by Giuseppe Carcani
[ALKIBIADES]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Aurelio Aureli by Gaetano Roccaforte**
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1746-10-29
Without dedicatee

In this work the Athenian general Alkibiades (Giuseppe Santarelli), a pupil of Socrates, was disguised
as Orestes and was secretly married to Creusa (Barbara Stabili). Elements of the story were retained
from 1679/7. Alcibiade opened on 29 October 1746.7 A license to print a translation from the French
account of this story into versi Italiani had been issued on 5 November 1736.

255 Attributed in a manuscript note in the libretto in I-Bag (see Sartori 5407) from a 1746 production in Treviso.

256 A Roman living in Venice, according to the libretto. Michelli is credited with the overture to Vivaldi's Rosmira (1738/2).
257 According to Groppo, MS, p. 284.

258 Groppo (MS, p. 287), attributing the text to Roccaforte, says it was indebted to Tullo Ostilio, which had first been set by M. A. Ziani on
Morselli's text in 1685. He may be correct in attributing the revisions to Roccaforte, but the underlying story corresponds more closely to
Aureli's Alcibiade, which was set by M. A. Ziani in 1679.

289 Diario ordinario, No. 4573, p. 3; also PV and A.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 503

 Ina production found to be very pleasing (PV), the balli were especially notable. The first act featured
a ballo of warrior nations (nazioni guerriere), the second a masquerade of comical personalities (comici
personaggi), and the third a play-within-a-play in which, to the sound of voices and instruments,
the dancers depicted The Triumph of Ariadne and Bacchus as it might take place in the current
delicious autumn season.*! In keeping with the Venetian debut of the dance company of Francesco
Turchi, scenari for all three balli were published separately. A separate libretto for the mascherata was
also published. Turchi's troupe remained active in Venice until 1766.

fi No known sources
Listed as Groppo 828; Wiel 460; Alm 998

1746/11 Scipione nelle Spagne Music by Baldassare Galuppi
[Sc1PIo IN SPAIN]
A dramma per musica Attribution uncertain?
rT Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With II conte Nespola; La donna guidice' SORTING DATE: 1746-11-05
& Without dedicatee
oO The story of Scipio Africanus the Elder had had several earlier treatments (see 1677/7 et al.). After

Publius Cornelius Scipione (Daniel Barba) conquered Carthage, he fell in love with the prisoner Anagilda
(Rosa Gabrielli), who was engaged to marry Luceius (Giuseppe Ant. Paganelli), the prince of the
Caltiberi. Ina magnanimous gesture, Publius ordered that all of the loot stolen from Anagilda be returned
to her to reconstitute her dowry. Scipione opened on 5 November 1746 (PV), when it was universally
applauded. It was revived in the winter after Pompeo in Armenia (1747/3) closed.?TM

A Scores in F-Pn (inc.); RU-Mcm
Listed as Groppo 829; Wiel 464; Alm 999

1746/12 Tito Manlio Music by Niccole Jommelli
[TiTUs MANLIus]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Matteo Noris et al.
rT Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1746-11-12
rs Without dedicatee
Oo Tito Manlio opened on 12 November 1746 (PV, DO).? Noris's text had first been set by C. F. Pollarolo

as 1697/2. In this shortened version various arias and scenes were changed. A libretto for the balli was
published separately. The work was revived in Vienna on 5 October 1747.

 Pallade veneta reported that Titus Manlius was recalled from his ashes by the poetry and the spirited
harmony given to him by the music of the celebrated Sig. Niccold Jommelli, and by the virtuoso ability
of famous singers. These have earned the full measures of applause. On the 18th Hasse described
the return of Gioacchino Conti (Egiziello) to the Venetian stage as follows: It was last Saturday
that he sang for the first time at San Giovanni Grisostomo with universal applause from the entire

260 A separate libretto was printed for the mascherata.
?6' On the similarity of language to that of Pallade veneta in the same era, cf. Ch. 1.3.

2 Frequently attributed to Piovene. Groppo (MS, p. 283) suggests that Francesco Vaneschi revised Zeno's text. (Piovene's text was set by
C. F. Pollarolo as 1712/2 in 1712, Zeno's by Albinoni as 1724/4.) The characters here do not correspond to those of either earlier cast.

263 A libretto for the first (Sartori 6422) was published by Modesto Fenzo in 1746.

264 Groppo MS, p. 286.

265 Groppo (MS, p. 284) says that the text was revised by San Vitale and that four arias were changed by Anton Maria Zanetti.
266 Diario ordinario, No. 4579, p. 3.

267 |_Vas, Miscellanea di Atti Diversi, Busta 58, Fasc. Pallade veneta, 19 novembre 1746, f. 4.

504

1746/13

1746/14

V1

Op,

1746/15

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

audience. He is indeed a worthy man and has one of the best voices which I have heard in my life. With
[it] he makes a noble appearance on stage and he is himself a graceful performer, above all when it
comes to expressing something tender.** Conti had already had stellar appearances (from 1730) in
Italy, Austria, and England. Even among male sopranos, he had a notably high range (c-c"). Here he
appeared in the role of Manlius, the hero's son. Gio. Battista Pinacci took the title role, with Isabella
Gandini (Servilia) and Catterina Barberis (Vitellia). Music for the balli at San Giovanni Grisostomo
were provided throughout 1746-47 by Giovanni Gallo.

Arias in A-Wn; D-B, Mbs, RH; F-Pn; GB-Lml; I-Mc, MOe, Nc, PAc, PLe, Ve

Listed as Groppo 830; Wiel 461; Alm 1000

Armida Music by Ferdinando Bertoni
[ARMIDE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Bartolomeo Vitturi
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With / marito vizioso SORTING DATE: 1746-12-26
Without dedicatee

Vitturi's account of this familiar tale appears to have been newly written. The text enjoyed revivals
in settings by Bertoni (1780) and Cherubini (1782), in both cases with the title Armida abbandonata.
Armida opened on 26 December 1746. The title-page is dated 1747. Rosa Gabrielli sang in the title
role with Giuseppe Ant. Paganelli (Rinaldo) and Anna Medici (Tancredi).

The scenes are lavishly described in the libretto. Act One opened in a countryside setting which featured
brooks and their grassy banks as well as statues of the Four Seasons on pedestals. In Act Two paintings
of the principal battles for the liberation of Jerusalem hung on the walls of Armide's palace. The sun
set over the sea in Act Three.

Score in D-Mbs

Listed as Groppo 835; Wiel 480; Alm 1005

Il Demetrio* Music by Johann Adolf Hasse
[DEMETRIOS]

A dramma per musica Text adapted anonymously from Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's?)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1746-12-26~

Dedicated to Wilhelm, Count of Schaumberg?

This revival of Hasse's work, first given at San Giovanni as 1732/3, could have opened just after
Christmas 1746 or from 4 January 1747 onward (the title-page is dated 1747). The cast for this production
included Isabella Gandini (Cleonice), Gioacchino Conti (Alceste), and Catterina Barberis (Barsene).
Scores in B-Bc; D-Dlb, LEmi (Dresden 1740); see 1732

Listed as Groppo 833; Wiel 478; Alm 1003

Il Catone in Utica Music adapted from L. Vinci by Niccold Jommelli?
[CATO IN UTICA]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio

268 Quoted from a letter in French in D-Dsa (Loc. 3284) and translated in Dietz, Dresden-Naples, pp. 115f. Hasse erred, however, in calling

this Conti's Venetian debut. That had occurred with the production of Schiassi's Demofoonte (1734/9), also given at San Giovanni.

2 This scene may well have been a reincarnation of one presented in Rampini's Armida in Damasco, given as 1711/6 at Sant' Angelo.

2 Apparently Wilhelm von Schaumburg-Lippe (1724-77), who built fortress (Wilhelmstein) on an artificial island in the middle of the Steinhuder
Meer near Hanover. The original counts of Schaumberg came from Thuringia.

27! Arias reset by Jommelli were indicated by asterisks in the libretto (Groppo MS, p. 285).

Oa

A

 1747a
 1747b

1747/1

m1

a
On

A

 1747
1747/2

m1

&

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 505

Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's?)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1746-12-26~
Without dedicatee

Vinci's original setting of Metastasio's text was the basis for a production given in Rome in January
1728, while Carlo Broschi (Farinelli) had made his Venetian debut in Leo's version (1728/9). Despite
its earlier origins, the text seems to have enjoyed its greatest popularity between 1745 and 1755, when
at least seventeen productions were based on it.

This revival could have opened at the end of 1746. The title-page gives the date as Carnovale 1747.
Domenico Panzacchi sang in the lead role, with Barbara Stabili as Marcia. The dancers, who were now
given a prominent place in libretti for San Cassiano, were the same as in Alcibiade. Turchi's balli
represented The Judgment of Paris (II giudicio di Paride), various comedians, and The Palace of Pallas
(La reggia di Pallade), choreographed with a set made of crystal. Libretti for the three ba//i were
published separately.

Scores (1728) in D-B, MUs; GB-Lbl (inc.); I-Mc, Ne; US-We

Listed as Groppo 834; Wiel 476; Alm 1004

Lo starnuto d'Ercole. Cf. Suppl. 5c.

Eurimedonte. Cf. Suppl. Sc.

L'Olimpiade Music by Giuseppe Scolari
[THE OLYMPIAD]

A dramma per musica Text adapted anonymously from Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival?)
With I! geloso schernito and II matrimonio ingegnosoTM SORTING DATE: 1747-01-15~
Without dedicatee

This production may have been terminated before the end of January 1747, for on the 29th the
noblewoman Caterina Barbarigo held a benefit concert in the theater (cf. Suppl. 5d). This suggests that
L'Olimpiade opened early in the Carnival period. The text was familiar from earlier settings by Vivaldi
(1734/4), Pergolesi/Hasse (1738/6), and Fiorillo (1745/5). The cast here included Domenico Negri
(Clistene) and Caterina Bassi Negri (Aristea) as well as the Narici sisters, Barbara (Argene) and Anna
(Licida).

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 836; Wiel 485; Alm 1006

Benefit recital for virtuose. See Suppl. 5d.

Caio Marzio Coriolano Music by Pietro Pulli?
[GAlus MARTIUS CORIOLANUS]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Abbot Zaccaria Seriman
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Given with balli SORTING DATE: 1747-01-21

Dedicated to Maria Teresa Cybo d'Este, Princess of Modena?

2? Wiel's listing for Catone (Teatri, p. 163) lacks the name of Nicol Cambi, who is indicated in the libretto.
273 Only the second is listed in Wiel (Teatri, p. 166).

274 Pulli was a Neapolitan who was in the service of the dedicatee.

275 The princess of Modena was present in Venice several times between the summers of 1746 and 1749. An engraved portrait is reproduced
facing the title-page of the libretto. The words Maria Teresa Cibo d'Este Duchessa di Massa et Carrara. Principessa Ereditaria di Modena
et Cetera encircle the portrait. (She acquired the title of princess through her marriage of 1742.) A caption underneath reads, Sotto gli auspici
di Sua Altezza Serenissima esce in Pubblico il Presente Dramma. Maria Teresa Cybo-Malaspina was a descendant of Francesco III d'Este.

506

1747/3

1747/4

mM

ao
OO

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

This revival of the work given at the Teatro Pubblico in Reggio Emilia in 1741 appears to have been
the choice of its dedicatee. The text resembles those on the same subject by Silvani (set by Perti in 1683/3)
and Noris (set by Pollarolo in 1698/4). Caio Marzio opened on 21 January 1746 M.V. (PV), when it
brought audiences full satisfaction. It shared the same casts of singers and dancers as Catone in Utica
(1746/15), which it directly followed. Giuseppe Santarelli sang in the title role with Barbara Stabili
(Vetturia).

The final entertainments for each act were elaborate. Act One ended with various concerted dances
(varie concertate danse) celebrating the conversion of Ulysses' companions back into men by Circe.
Act Two was followed by pleasing dances (balli piacevoli) presented by nymphs and shepherds in
a bacchanal. After Act Three, Galatea descended onto the shore, where she encountered Neptune
and other marine gods. All of them danced together.

Score in I-Vnm

Listed as Groppo 837; Wiel 477; Alm 1007

Pompeo in Armenia Music attributed to Giuseppe Scarlatti?
[POMPEY IN ARMENIA]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Bartolomeo Vitturi?
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1747-01-21~
Without dedicatee

After the Roman general Pompey imprisoned Tigranes and subjugated Armenia, his enemy Mithridates
interceded and humbled Pompey. Given the constraints of an opening (1746/13) on 26 December,
followed by the production of two new works (this and 1747/5) as well as the revival of an old one,
all completed by the start of Lent (22 February), it seems probable that Pompeo, which had been given
in Pisa in 1744, would have been scheduled to open in the middle of January 1747. Scipione (1746/12)
was revived soon after its opening, suggesting that Pompeo was not well received. The cast included
Daniel Barba (Pompeo), Anna Medici (Tigrane), and Rosa Gabrielli (Laodice).

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 838; Wiel 481; Alm 1008

Ezio Music by Giovanni Battista Pescetti
[AETIUS]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Given with dalli and an untitled intermezzo SORTING DATE: 1747-01-28

Dedicated to Thomas Duncombe

The first setting of Metastasio's text heard in Venice had been that of Porpora (1728/8). Lampugnani's
version (1737/6, revived as 1743/6) had followed. The last traceable setting of this all but immortal
text was that of Mercadante (Turin, 1827). This version of Ezio opened on 28 January 1746 M.V. (PV),

276 The figure of Galatea had been popular in private entertainments in recent years. Cf. Suppl. 7, entries for 1737 and 1740.

27 The Neapolitan composer Giuseppe Scarlatti (1723-77) was the nephew of Alessandro and the brother of the buffa singer Rosa Scarlatti.
Groppo (MS, p. 286) identified the music as the same as that given in Cesena but did not name the composer. Wiel's attribution (Teatri,
p. 165) is from Allacci.

278 See also Tigrane below.
27 Groppo MS, p. 286.
28 Gentleman whose family had built a large country estate in the west of England.

28! Here there is one less character than in the settings of 1728, 1737, and 1743.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 507

when it brought complete satisfaction to its audience. Gioacchino Conti now sang in the title role,

with Niccole Gori (Valentiniano III), Isabella Gandini (Fulvia), and Leonora Ferrandini (Onoria).
A Arias in US-BEm, We

Listed as Groppo 839; Wiel 479; Alm 1009

1747/5 La caduta d'Amulio Music by Antonio Gaetano Pampani*
[THE FALL OF AEMULIUS]
im A dramma per musica Text by Carlo Gandini
Performed at Sant'Angelo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1747-02-06~
& Without dedicatee
 This tale (billed in publicity as Amulio tiranno d'Alba) gives an unconventional account of Aemulius's

relations with Sylvia (Rosa Gabrielli). This couple were the parents of the twins Romulus and Remus,
who, according to legend, founded Rome. Daniel Barba sang as Albion, the tyrant of Alba. The available
space for this production was during the last ten days of Carnival, with a probable opening between
5 and 7 February.*

No musical sources known

A Listed as Groppo 840; Wiel 482; Alm 1010

 1747d Il Cajetto. Cf. Suppl. 5c.

 1747e Didone abbandonata. Cf. Suppl. Sc.
1747/6 Tigrane Music by Giovanni Battista Lampugnani
[TIGRANES]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Silvani?*
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1747-05-10
rs) Dedicated to Canziana Soranzo Corner, Nob. Ven.
O@ This tale was a shortened version of 1741/4.' In it Tigranes has fallen in love with Cleopatra, the

daughter of his ally Mithridates. An untitled libretto for the balli was published separately. Tigrane
opened on 10 May 1747 (DO, PV). It met a highly enthusiastic response. The actors [i.e., singers]
and the dancers were so well received that the theater was full every night.** The dance-master was
Giulio Bigatti, who, like Lampugnani, was from Milan. Giuseppe Ricciarelli sang in the title role, with
Giovanna Cesati (Cleopatra) and Gaetano Ottani (Mitridate).

28 On the billboard at the door of the theater the title was given as Amulio tiranno d'Alba (Groppo MS, p. 287).
28 Now identified as a member of the Accademia Filarmonica (of Bologna).

2 The name is equated by Wiel (Teatri, p. 165) with Carlo Goldoni, and the attribution is accepted by Sartori and others. (Wiel notes that
Allacci recorded the librettist's surname as Gardici.) Since Pampani was from Modena and Gandini was a family of significance there, the
existence of a compatriot named Carlo Gandini is distinctly possible. There was also a currently active singer named Isabella Gandini. La
caduta d'Amulio is not an accepted work in the Goldoni canon.

28 An issue of Pallade veneta mentions a bull hunt in the Campo Sant' Angelo but not any operatic activity on the 4th. The overall dating is
not beyond question, however, as different dates of publication are given in two libretti (1746 in Sartori 4328 and 1747 in Sartori 4329. Normally,
this kind of discrepancy would suggest a St. Stephen's opening, but in this case the slot was filled by Armida (1746/13).

286 With revisions by Bartolomeo Vitturi and Carlo Goldoni. But the situation is muddled. Sonneck attributes the text to Silvani, NG to Vitturi.
As the listing for Arena's setting of Tigrane (1741/5) makes clear, Vitturi had a hand in revising the work at that juncture. This text involves
the same characters but has shed five scenes from the 1741 exemplar.

287 Groppo (MS, p. 288) holds that it is closely related apart from being shortened, but the textual relationships do not sustain this view.
288 Groppo MS, p. 288.

508

1747/7

TOK)

1747/8

mM

&
+00

289

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 842; Wiel 483; Alm 1012

La finta pazza Music anonymous
[THE WOMAN WHO PRETENDED TO BE MAD]

A dramma giocoso per musica Text anonymous
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With I/ marchese del Bosco; balli SORTING DATE: 1747-05-10
Without dedicatee

Pandolfo, who is here the guardian ofa hospital for mad women, is also the tutor of the well-born Corinda,
who is on the brink of marrying Florante. Delfa, who is in love with Florante, poses as a madwoman
and interrupts the wedding celebration planned by Pandolfo. Cianfrone, who loves Corinda, poses as
an astrologer and employs his own means of upsetting the plans. The action takes place in Rome. An
untitled libretto for the balli was published separately.

This production, which opened on 10 May 1747 (DO, PV), marked the inauspicious debut of Angelo
Mingotti as the theater's impresario. The intermezzo was greatly applauded, but the drama itself
received a cool reception, both for its poetry and for its performance. The problems likely issued
from the inexperience of the cast (see also 1747, Suppl. 5d). The Pisan singer Costantino Compassi,
who was to appear in many later works, made his Venetian debut as Pandolfo. All remaining members
of the cast were Bolognese.

The title, which can be traced back to a Monteverdi work of 1627, was perennial but resemblances
by the mid-eighteenth century were tenuous at best. Francesco Sacrati's La finta pazza, set to a text
by Giulio Strozzi (Venice, 1641), had been a good-humored work featuring a veritable army of gods
and mythical heroes  Ulysses, Juno, Minerva, Jupiter, Venus, and many others  together with a
court musician who was a eunuch and a chorus of buffoons. This account is clearly unrelated. On recent
contributions to the authorship, see 1745/7.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 843; Wiel 486; Alm 1013

Achille in Sciro Music by Gioan Battista Runcher
[ACHILLES ON SCYROS]

A dramma per musica Text adapted anonymously from Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1747-05-10

Dedicated to Carlo Filippo Cottone, Prince of Castelnuovo'

Metastasio's text had been set by Caldara for Vienna in 1736 and by Chiarini for Sant' Angelo (1739/1).
It remained in use throughout the century. This version was greatly shortened to suit it to the stage

Or Madama Dulcinea e il Cuoco.

2% According to Maria Giovanna Miggiani (Sulle trace della troupe Mingotti, forthcoming), the new contract ran from the Ascension fair
in 1747 through the Carnival period of 1750. Rent for the theater was 550 ducats per annum, in addition to gifts expected by the proprietors.

25! Groppo MS, p. 288.

2 Anna Castelli (Delfa) made three further appearances in Venice, Laura Brescagli (Florante) one. Colomba Cantelli (Corinda), Maria Maddalena
Santelli (Lindora), and Petronio Manelli (Cianfrone) were not to be heard again in Venice. A humiliating experience awaited the [unnamed]
son of the Venetian widow, Laura Correr Bembo (nee Querini), who, when presenting his box request for this production, discovered that
this box had been the property of the late Marshal Schulenburg, to whom it had long ago been assigned by the House of Hanover (I-Vas, IS,
Busta 914, fasc. Palchi Querini).

?% It is survived neither by text nor by music. Its existence is documented only by textual references.

2% A Palermitan nobleman of extensive means and classical learning.

Ai

 1747f
1747/9

1747/10

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 509

and the season, although it contained many new arias. An untitled libretto for the balli was published
separately. Achille opened on 10 May 1747 (DO, PV). It featured Anna Gird, in her final appearance
on the Venetian stage, in the title role with Domenico Negri (Licomede), Elisabetta Ronchetti (Deidamia),
and Carlo Nicolini (Ulisse).?"

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 841; Wiel 488; Alm 1011

Benefit recital for virtuose. Cf. Suppl. 5d.

Il protettore alla moda Music anonymous
[THE STYLISH PROTECTOR]

A drama giocoso Text derived from Giuseppe Maria Buini
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1747-10-28~
Without dedicatee

After San Samuele was gutted by fire (30 September 1747), its troupe moved to San Giovanni Grisostomo
for the 1747-48 season. Its relocation created a hiatus in the comedy offerings which normally opened
in October. // protettore should have benefitted from these circumstances. The action portrayed in the
libretto begins on the last night of Carnival. The text was derived from that of Chi non fa non falla
(1732/6).

I protettore contained three serious and four buffo roles. Doralice (Anna Castelli), the mother of the
prima donna Diacinta (Annonciata Garrani), is relieved to have reached the last night of Carnival.?*
Costantino Compassi played the role of the protector, Monst Voragine, with Felice Novelli as the
impresario Saltobello, and Matteo Bevilaqua as the poet Volpino.

The production was very well received not only for the celebrated buffo, but [also] for the sumptuous
costumes and stupendous sets, among which there were those imitating the theater boxes, which were
specially painted for this production. It is not surprising that the work was quickly revived after
an ill-received production of La vanita delusa (1747/12).

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 846; Wiel 484; Alm 1016

L'Arminio Music by Baldassare Galuppi
[ARMINIUS]

A dramma per musica Text adapted anonymously from Antonio Salvi
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1747-11-04

Without dedicatee

25 Groppo MS, p. 287.
2% Since 1745 Gird had leased three boxes at San Samuele. In 1748 she sought to retrieve her deposit, which then totaled 3,000 ducats. It appears

that these monies were to form part of her dowry. It amounted to 4,000 ducats when on 20 July 1748 she secretly became the second wife
of the Mantuan count Antonio Maria Zanardi Landi (Vio, Gird, pp. 29-36).

2 Groppo (MS, p. 289) attributes only the text to Buini. Some arias were by Galuppi, but the bulk of the music was probably Buini's.

8 The role of Diacinta is newly added. The role of Mamolo has been eliminated. In her opening appearance Doralice complains of the four
hours she had to spend each night in the theater helping her daughter dress (ogni sera vestirsi, ogni sera spogliarsi...).

2 In the 1732 work the protector was styled Baron Seccagine.

30 Groppo MS, p. 289, Questo drama incontro grande applauso non solo per il celebre buffo, ma per il sontuoso vesiario, e stupende scene
fra le quali ve ne era, che prendeva I' ordine de palchi, chi per questa recita restorono, entro, e fuori deppinti in tutti gli ordini.

510 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Oo Salvi's libretto had first been set by Alessandro Scarlatti (Pratolino, 1703). Its earliest setting in Venice
was Pollarolo's (1722/8). The Venetian production opened on 4 November 1747 and continued during
the subsequent Carnival period.* Giovanni Antonio Donini appeared in the title role, with Maria Camatti
(Tusnelda), Teresa Castellini (Ramise), and Amelio Arrigoni (Segeste). Libretti for the ballo di guerrieri
(Act One) and for L Imeneo di Bacco e Arianna (the ballo of Act Two) were published separately.

A Arias in I-MOe, Ne, PLcon, PS, Ve, Vnm?0*

Listed as Groppo 845; Wiel 475; Alm 1015

1747/11 Il re dispietato Music anonymous*
[THE UNHAPPY KING]
A dramma per musica [satire] Text anonymous
i Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's?)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1747-11-11~
& Without dedicatee

C@0 This musical satire on a dramma per musica, which is a sequel to Artanaganamenone (1731/8), was
performed by comedians at Sant'Angelo in the autumn of 1747. While a specific date of opening is
elusive, it is known to have been received with great applause.* This appears to have been the first
work produced under the management of Gasparo Gozzi and his wife, Luisa Bergalli. In relation
to Artanaganamenone, miscellaneous guards, soldiers, and Arabian priests disappeared. Role names
were changed in minor ways. Malmocor was still a tyrant on the Arabian desert. His daughter Papinubia
was now engaged to marry Garganastare, the king of Euboca, whose cousin Miradaclea, the widow
of Sardanapalos, was enslaved by Malmocor. The action took place in Thermopolis.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 844; Wiel 489; Alm 1014

 1747g Celebration at the French embassy. Cf. Suppl. Sa.
1747/12 La vanita delusa Music anonymous
[VANITY DELUDED]
A drama giocoso Text attributed to Antonio Gori
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1747-12-26~
x Without dedicatee

3! Diario ordinario, No. 4729, p. 5. Wiesend (1984), p. 309, gives 26 November 1747 as the opening date.
3 Groppo MS, p. 157.

33 A Ithough its description is more modest, the latter ballo would seem to be a revival of one given the preceding year with Alcibiade (1746/10).
However, the choreography for the earliest performance was by Francesco Turchi, while that for this production was by Francesco Catanella.

3 There was a Roman production in the same year, and some surviving arias seem to be from it rather than the Venetian production.

3 Both the text and the music of Artanaganamenone (1731/8), to which this work was related, are generally attributed to Buini, with the possible
participation of Cordans. Buini is therefore suggested as the principal creator of the work; NGDMM/2 suggests the participation of Galuppi.
According to a tongue-in-cheek note to the reader, the textual model had been praised throughout Italy and southern Germany.

3% The seasonal designation comes from Groppo (MS, p. 288). Sant' Angelo had a thin schedule in 1747-48 and an autumn work is most likely
to have opened in the St. Martin's period.

3' The company was organized by April 1747 (GL, p. xxxiv) but it is unlikely to have provided the preceding production (Tigrane, 1747/6).
In establishing a troupe, it was the Gozzi's intention to make it a traveling company, for they proposed to make an appearance in Verona over
the summer. The Gozzi were members of the Accademia dei Granelleschi, which generally promoted conservative ideals of literature.

OOo

1748/1

i

@
Ow

1748/2

m1

Op

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 511

Marchese Panicone*' (Costantino Compassi), who fancies himself a poet, has three children. Two upstarts
adopt false identities to woo his daughters Bellalba (Annonciata Garrani) and Lisaura (Rosa Scarlatti).
His son Sancio (Felice Novelli) is attracted to the flirtatious Signora Dulcine (Laura Brescagli), who
is really Orazio, one of the secret suitors. The servant Lisetta (Annina Castelli) is enchanted by his male
persona. Sancio is adept at discussing music and imitating famous virtuose.'" The fleet of Captain Zotta
is seen in the second baillo. The text had originally been set by Chintzer for the Cocomero (Florence,
1731). These performances probably occurred during the days following Christmas. After four
performances, J/ protettore alla moda (1747/9) was revived."

No sources identified
Listed as Groppo 848; Wiel 498; Alm 1018

L' Adriano Music by Vincenzo Ciampi*
[HADRIAN]

A dramma per musica Text adapted from Pietro Metastasio'*
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's?)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1748-01-16~
Without dedicatee

Metastasio's popular text (usually called Adriano in Siria) had been set for Venice by Giacomelli (1733/2)
and Giai (1740/2). In real life Teresa Castellani (Sabina) was engaged to marry Gio. Antonio Donini
(Adriano), adding a contemporary overlay to the plot. Ciampi's setting was sufficiently popular to justify
a performance (as Adriano in Siria) in London in 1750. While the date of opening is unknown, the
production can be sequestered to the 1747-48 cycle. Its roster of singers and dancers exactly duplicated
that of Arminio (1747/10), which opened in November 1747. Although L Adriano could have opened
just after Christmas 1747, it is more likely, because of the relatively long Carnival period (9 January-27
February) in 1748, to have opened in early to mid-January.

Score in I-MOe; arias in Favourite Songs (London, 1750)

Listed as Groppo 847; Wiel 491; Alm 1017

La finta pazzia di Diana Music apparently derived from Luca Antonio Predieri**
[THE FEIGNED MADNESS OF DIANA]

A pastorale giocosa Text anonymous
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With L'ammalato immaginario, La serva padrona;>" balli SORTING DATE: 1748-01-23~

Without dedicatee

Feigned madness roles had been used in and around Florence for more than a century and could probably
be traced much further in the oral traditions of the commedia. In this case, the action was situated in

3 The name (from the root panico) indicates a portly gentleman.

3 The sister of the composer Giuseppe Scarlatti and a noted opera buffa singer.

3! Sancio lists painting, sculpture, architecture, poetry, music, war, astronomy, physics, chemistry, and logic as the subjects on which he can
converse and offer judgment with his usual good taste (libretto, pp. 38f.). He discusses his musical skills on pp. 40f.

3" Groppo MS, p. 290.

3. Ciampi (c. 1719-1762) spent his formative years in Naples and Palermo. A cembalist, he held various positions at the Ospedale de' Incurabili,
Venice, from 1747, but spent six years (1749-56) in London on paid leave.

38 By some accounts the four arias for Teresa Castellini (Sabina) cited by Groppo (MS, p. 290) were also set to music by her (e.g., Alm, Catalog,
p. 652). Their texts were published separately from the libretto (Sartori 2627).

3'4 Predieri was the composer of the music for the version given in Florence in 1719. As here, L 'ammalato immaginario was given with it.

3'5 Groppo MS, p. 290.

512

Ai

 1748a
 1748b
 1748c
 1748d
 1748e

1748/3

mM

is)
OOo

1748/4

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

a woods near the sea of Pisa. Rosa Scarlatti sang in the lead role (Diana)."* La finta pazzia was given
by the same cast in the same year at the new Burg-Theater in Vienna.* That this work is on a pastoral
subject and has only four roles*"* could indicate that it was intended for the last nights of Carnival. Since
San Moise had a designated Fat Thursday (Giovedi Grasso) work (La partenza fortunata; Suppl. 5b)
in 1748, La finta pazzia must have been the principal work for Carnival 1748 at San Moise. It would
have followed the revival (from c. 4 January) of // protettore alla moda (1747/9; see also 1747/12).

No musical sources known
Groppo 849; Wiel 496; Alm 1019

Bradamante. Cf. Suppl. 3a.
Gianguir. Cf. Suppl. Sc.

La clemenza di Tito. Cf. Suppl. 5b.
Partenza fortunata. Cf. Suppl. 5b.

Didone abbandonata. Cf. Supp. 5c.

Ipermestra Music by Ferdinando Bertoni
[HYPERMNESTRA]

A dramma per musica Text adapted anonymously from Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1748-05-22
Without dedicatee

The production of Jpermestra, beginning on 22 May 1748, marked the reopening of the Teatro di San
Samuele following the fire on 30 September 1747. The theater, which had been rebuilt in 55 days, now
had one less tier of boxes. The Imer troupe was to return to San Samuele in the autumn of 1748. *Angela
Catterina Riboldi sang in the title role with Domenico Panzacchi (Danao) and Giuseppe Ricciarelli
(Linceo). Gluck's setting of Metastasio's text had been given in Venice as 1744/10; this version was
significantly abbreviated. An untitled libretto for one of the balli was published separately.

Arias in B-Bc; I-Gl, Vnm

Listed as Groppo 852; Wiel 502; Alm 1022

Litre cicisbei ridicoli Music by Natale Resta?
[THE THREE SILLY Escorts]

A dramma giocoso Text attributed to Carlo Antonio Vasini*TM!
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1748-05-22

Without dedicatee

In eighteenth-century Venice, cicisbei were noblemen who served as official escorts to noblewomen
to whom they were neither married or engaged. The couples cross lines of social class in this satire,
in which the wealthy but squandering Giscone and the vain but poor Lindoro (the first and second

3'6 A work of the same name (Sartori 10509) had been given, with music by L. A. Predieri, in Florence in 1719. W. Kirkendale (Medici, p.
476) says that L'ammalato immaginario was given with it.

317 Sartori 10511.

38 The others were those of Eurilla, Marchionne, and Fileno.
3 Groppo MS, p. 291.
30 Resta was a maestro di cappella in Milan. One aria of the work (Tre giorni son) is sometimes attributed to Ciampi.

*! Allacci, Drammaturgia, col. 937, attributed the text to Resta. Ortolani (TO, x, 1245) suggests that this work was by Goldoni and Medebach.



1748/5

fi

 1748f
1748/6

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 513

cicisbei) are both in love with the aspiring singer Modulina, a mock noblewoman. The gentleman Ottavio
(the third cicisbeo) is nominally in love with Bice but secretly adores Modulina. Meanwhile Cuccamondo,
who poses as Modulina's servant, is really her husband. The cast is not named in the libretto.

Litre cicisbei is likely to have opened on 22 May 1748. It ran long enough for two arias to be changed,
but the new arias may have been for its revival after the very short run of Orazio.* Its popularity,
which clearly overshadowed interest in other works planned for Sant' Angelo, such as La finta frascatana
(Suppl. 1), was the lone success of the otherwise unfortunate tenure of Luisa Bergalli Gozzi as impresaria
(1747-48). Charles Burney commented favorably on a later production of the work.

Score in I-MOe

Listed as Groppo 853; Wiel 499; Alm 1023

Orazio Music by Pietro Auletta?
[ORAZIO]

A dramma giocoso Text attributed to Antonio Palomba
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1748-05-29
Without dedicatee

Although Orazio was the best known of Auletta's works, the text appears to have been a thinly disguised
remake of La gara per gloria (1744, Suppl. 5b), revived during the preceding Carnival at San Moise
as La partenza fortunata (1748; Suppl. 5b). It is otherwise linked with the later pastiches // maestro
di musica (Barcelona, 1750; Paris, 1752), L impresario abbandonato (Verona and Turin, 1748; Munich,
1749), and La scolara alla moda (Florence, 1760). Groppo reports that Orazio was performed only
three times during the spring of 1748 before being scrapped for a revival of Li tre cicisbei (1748/4).
Excerpts from later pastiches in CH-Bu; D-DI, Wa; GB-LbI; I-F1

Listed as Groppo 854; Wiel 500; Alm 1117

La finta frascatana. See Suppl. 1.

La semplice spiritosa Music attributed to Giovanni (?) Fiorini?25
[THE SPIRITED SIMPLETON]

A dramma giocoso per musica Adapted from Carlo Goldoni*
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1748-11-04~
Without dedicatee

La semplice spiritosa begins with a depiction of the mysterious pomp with which Venice is wed to
the Adriatic on the feast of Ascension. Doralba (Livia Segantini) and her niece Rosmira (Rodegonda
Travaglia), who have come to witness this spectacle, are assisted by Ergasto (Anna Bastiglia) and Orazio
(Giuseppe Cosmi). The balli were choreographed by Giovanni Battista Nesti (Scaramuccia). La
semplice spiritosa, first performed in Florence in 1747, has to have preceded La scuola moderna (1748/9),
which was based on a revised version of the text, apparently with different music.

32 Groppo MS, p. 291.

3 Pietro Auletta (c. 1698-c. 1771) was a Neapolitan composer known largely for this work.

324 Apparently Groppo refers to Sartori 17337 when he says (MS, p. 291) that the title-page does not mention either the theater or the season.
No cast members are identified in the libretto.

35 Except for arias requested by the singers (Groppo MS, p. 292). Alm (Catalog, p. 657) postulates that Fiorini's baptismal name might have
been Giacomo. Miggiani has recently shown (Mingotti, forthcoming) that the San Moise impresario sublet the theater to a dilettante named
Giovanni Fiorini for the 1752-53 season.

6 By the Mingotti troupe (Miggiani. /oc. cit.). Palomba is sometimes credited with the revision.

514 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 855; Wiel 494; Alm 1025

1748/7 Clotilde Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi
[CLOTILDE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Francesco Passarini
im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With J/ conte immaginario SORTING DATE: 1748-11-09
wz Without dedicatee
Sac) In this text, used in Porpora's setting for San Moise as Amore e fortuna (1727/14), the infant Roger,

born an heir to the throne of Taranto, was raised by a pirate and his wife. Now grown and known as
Richard (Francesco Guerrieri), he fell in love with Clotilde (Catterina Pillaia), who proved to be his
sister.' Clotilde opened on 9 November 1748.%

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 856; Wiel 490; Alm 1026

1748/8 Evergete Music by Lorenzo Gibelli*
[EVERGETES]
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Francesco Silvani by Domenico Lalli
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1748-11-16
ae Without dedicatee
0 The text was a slightly modified version of Candace (1740/6), the story of which was derived from

Li veri amici (1712/8).>* The cast included Giuseppe Ricciarelli (Evergete), Filippo Giorgi (Amasi),
Giovanna Cesati (Candace), and Luigi Ristorini (Lagide). An untitled libretto for one ballo was published
separately. Evergete opened on 16 November 1748 (GD).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 857; Wiel 493; Alm 1027

1748/9 La scuola moderna Music newly attributed to Giovanni Fiorini!

ossia La maestra di buon gusto
[THE MODERN SCHOOL, OR THE TEACHER OF GOOD TASTE]
A dramma giocoso per musica Text adapted from A. Palomba?
M1 Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's?)

7 Despite the similarity of titles, the subject here is different from G. B. Neri's text for Ruggieri (1696/8), which was revised as Amar per
vendetta (1702/7).

38 GDN, I, f.12.
32 A member of the Accademia Filarmonica, this Bolognese composer was recommended to the Grimani theater by Count Cornelio Pepoli.
33 Set by Paulati (1712/8), Albinoni (1723/2), Leo (Rome, 1731), and Galuppi (Rome, 1747).

33! Attribution by Miggiani (Sulle tracce della troupe Mingotti, IMS, 2002, which concerns the management of San Moise (1743-52). Fiorini
sublet the theater (with Antonio Codognato) from Angelo Mingotti in 1752. James Jackman attributes it only to Ciampi in GO. It was attributed
to Gioacchino Cocchi by Sonneck. The latest version of Grove (NGDMM/2, 2000) hedges the question by attributing it to Cocchi, Fiorini,
Ciampi, and others.

332 Adaptation newly credited to the troupe of Angelo Mingotti (Miggiani, loc. cit.). Generally considered until recently to be adapted from
Palomba's La maestra (Naples, 1747), which, according to Goldoni's memoirs (Ortolani, TO, x, 1266), had its roots in scenari used for commedie
dell'arte in the 1720s. Goldoni's name did not appear in the libretto nor was the text included in an early collection of his dramme giocose
(by Teverin), but it was included in the posthumous collected edition published by Zatta (1795).

fi

 1748g
1748/10

ry

a
o BOO

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 515

Given with balli** SORTING DATE: 1748-11-30~
Without dedicatee

Groppo claimed a relationship of the text to that of La semplice spiritosa (1748/6),*TM but the similarities
were, for the times, superficial, although the casting was entirely the same.*** Four of the characters
(Agnesa, Arnoldo, Menecchina, Orazio) were renamed (as Drusilla, Belfiore, Leonora, Lindoro). Drusilla
is a mistress of love and deceit rather than truth (maestra di amori e di finzioni piuttosto che di
scienza).* The parte buffa is entirely changed.** The role of Belfiore (Carlo Paganini) has been
extended. The text for La scuola moderna, first given in Florence (autumn 1745), was printed
anonymously in 1748. The music for the work given under the titles La maestra (London, winter 1749)
and La maestra di scola (Verona, autumn 1749), usually now credited to Ciampi, merits re-evaluation.
The schedule of other offerings at San Moise suggests that this elaboration of La semplice spiritosa
probably opened towards the end of November 1748.

The staging appears to have been different from that of La semplice spiritosa. The Venetian-ness of
the scenery is more emphatic, probably reflecting the influence of Goldoni. Drusilla (Maria Angela
Paganini) sits making lace and Leonora (Caterina Baratti) crochets as the work opens. The characters
are provocative in their remarks. The widow Doralba (Livia Segantini) has promised her niece Rosmira
(Rodegonda Travaglia) to the count Belfiore (Carlo Paganini). Belfiore allows his pupil Lauretta (who
has a cold) to sing one aria (Lungi da questo core, Barbaro ingrato amore) to show off her
accomplishments. With her sister, Ninetta, she also sings a duet parodying the genre.** Drusilla is
eventually paired off with the manipulative Ergasto (Anna Bastiglia), who professes to idolize the
mysterious pomp with which Venice is wed to the Adriatic.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 858; Wiel 495; Alm 1028

La vedova scaltra. Cf. Suppl. 3a.

Demofoonte" Music by Johann Adolf Hasse
[DEMOPHON]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1748-12-26
Without dedicatee

Hasse's setting of this text had had its premiere at Hubertusburg (Dresden) on 9 February 1748; it was
to be produced in Copenhagen in 1749. Earlier settings included those of Caldara (Vienna, 4 November
1733), Schiassi (1734/9), and Latilla (1737/9). Demofoonte opened on 26 December 1748 (PV).* A
festive opening scene featured the arrival of the princess of Phrygia. Filippo Giorgi sang in the title
role with Margherita Parisini (Creusa) and Giovanni Carestini (Timante). Mamy has detailed the changes

333 Choreographed by G. B. Nesti (Scarramuccia).

344 Groppo MS, p. 293.

35 There is also a role for Lauretta, who is not named in the cast list of the libretto.
6 See Ortolani, TO, x, 1266.

337 Groppo MS, p. 293.

338 Their double-text reads in part, Non v'e pit crudele, crudele, di te;/Non v'e pit fedele, pit fido di me./Va tra l'ircane belve, barbaro traditor;/Va
tra le crude belve, esercita il tuo rigor.

3 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 308.

+ Three days after its opening, the first Grimani theater, SS. Giovanni e Paolo, was torn down to make way for an oil-barreling establishment
(una bottega d'un botaro da botte da oglio, Groppo MS, p. 293) .

516 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

made by Hasse for Carestini's appearance in the Venetian production. Owing to further revisions in
the female casting in the midst of the Venetian production, two versions of the score survive.TM"!
A Scores in B-Br (Dresden); D-D] (Dresden, 2 copies), Hs; I-Ne, Vc (autograph but inc.), I- VIRE (undated,
inc.), Vnm (Venice); arias in B-Bc; US-AA*
Listed as Groppo 859; Wiel 512; Alm 1029

1748/11 Camilla, regina de' volsci' Composer(s) unknown
[CAMILLA, QUEEN OF THE VOLSCHI]
A dramma per musica Text by Silvio Stampiglia*
ry Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With I] Giramondo and balli* SORTING DATE: 1748-12-28~
& Without dedicatee
0 By coincidence, it seems, this was a fiftieth-anniversary revival of 1698/5, a text which had met with

spectacular success in the late 1690s. The arias and staging were substantially revised. Anna Tonelli
now sang in the title role with Giuseppe Baratti (Latino) and Catterina Pillaia (Lavinia). While the
approximate dating can be conferred with confidence, no documentation of its opening survives.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 860; Wiel 507; Alm 1030

1749/1 Bertoldo, Bertoldino, e Cacasenno Music attributed to Vincenzo Ciampi"
[BERTOLDO, SR., BERTOLDO, JR., AND LITTLE CACASENNO]
A dramma comico per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1749-01-04
& Without dedicatee
-

This text is a fantasy inspired by the rustic tale of Giulio Cesare Croce. Among its many retellings were
those of Adriano BanchieriTM and an anonymous one in oftava rima published by Lelio della Volpe
(Bologna, 1736).*4 Goldoni's text may also have debts to San Fantin's production of Bertoldo (1718/1).
Here Cacasenno (Giuseppe Cosmi), the grandson of the old, astute Bertoldo (Carlo Paganini) and
the son of the silly, clumsy Bertoldino (Francesco Carrattoli), has reached adulthood and his lack
of common sense has malicious effects.** While King Albuin* (Anna Bastiglia) is passing through

3! Mamy (Revisions, p. 241) indicates that the Marciana score is an assemblage of working drafts in five hands. The Paris score, while being
an autograph, is missing various recitatives.

3 Numerous other sources for later versions.
3 With revisions by the fratelli Zanetti, according to Groppo (MS, p. 294).
34 This is the first libretto to indicate that altre [scene] were used per gl'intermezzi a balli. All of the scenery was by Francesco Zanchi.

+4 The Neapolitan Ciampi came to Venice to collaborate with Goldoni but also took an appointment as maestro di coro at the Incurabili. Some
of the arias in this work were introduced by the singers rather than being based on the text which Goldoni intended.

346 Goldoni acknowledged Croce's work (Le sottilissime astuzie di Bertoldo and Le piacevoli e ridicolose simplicita di Bertoldino) in his note
to the reader. Banchieri's Cacasenno, figlio del semplice Bertoldino (1606) has recently been reprinted together with Croce's works, ed. Nico
Orengo (Milan: Arnoldo Mondadori, 1995).

*47 & fede for a Venetian printing of this version was issued by the Riformatori dello Studio di Padova on 5 November 1736. In a Venetian
context, the text satirized the life of the peasantry encountered during villeggiatura, for it depicted a more innocent and rustic vita di campagna
(Ortolani, TO, x, 1271).

348 A note to the reader asks that the anachronism of interposing Bertoldo and Cacasenno be overlooked, as it has been in the case of Metastasio's
interposition of Dido and Aeneas. The name Cacasenno could possibly be related to the word cassenno, which is the Bolognese for a cattle
stall. The contrast between rustic and urban life was a key feature of Banchieri's account.

3 For a historical account of the king, see 1691/5.

Ow

1749/2

1749/3

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 517

the countryside near Verona, where Bertoldo's family live, he falls in love with Menghina (Maria Angela
Paganini), the wife of Bertoldino.

Bertoldo is generally reported to have opened on 26 (or 27) December 1748, but Groppo is quite
unambiguous in his dating of 4 January 1749. With various changes of scene and aria,**' he may simply
be saying that the work was revived soon after a late- December opening or preview performance, since
it had no earlier production.

According to Ortolani, the production was a raging success.*** The work was produced at the Teatro
Obizzi, Padua, for the fair of St. Anthony in 1750. There it opened on 11 June.** It was presented by
seven singers and eight dancers. Ciampi's work was reproduced in Milan (at the Ducale, 1750) and
in Rome (at the Argentina, 1751).** Revised versions were given under the titles Bertoldo in corte in
Paris (1753), Bertoldino alla corte del re Alboino (Potsdam, 1754), and Cacasenno alla corte del re
Alboino (London, Covent Garden, 1755). Favourite Songs from this last version were published in that
year and in 1762. The Paris version, later parodied in Favart's Ninette a la cour (1755), played a key
role in the querelle des bouffons (1753) and became a model in the development of opera comique.
Scores in B-Lc (London, 1755); I-MOe; F-Pc (Paris, 1753); aria in US-BEm

Listed as Groppo 861; Wiel 514; Alm 1031

Il vello d'oro Music by Giuseppe Scolari
[THE GOLDEN FLEECE]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Matteo Zanetti*
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With J/ conte immaginario SORTING DATE: 1749-01-22
Without dedicatee

This adaptation of the text for Medea e Giasone (1726/13) opened on 22 January 1749. One role was
eliminated, one character renamed, and various arias were changed. The cast included Anna Tonelli
(sifile), Catterina Pillaia (Medea), and Giuseppe Baratti (Giasone). Neither the music nor the maestro
was well received.>%*

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 862; Wiel 508; Alm 1033

Anagilda Music anonymous
[ANAGILDA]

A dramma per musica Text attributed to Girolamo Gigli**
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With La favola dei tre gobbi and balli SORTING DATE: 1749-01-29~
Without dedicatee

35 The earlier date is given in Ortolani, TO, x, 1271, and suggested in (A); the later is given in Wiesend (Galuppi, 1984), p. 310.

35! Groppo MS, p. 294: Questo drama ande in scena dopo li tre primi giorni dell'anno.... The title-page is dated 1749.
3 Ortolani, TO, x, 1271.

35 GDN, I, f. 76.

354 Ciampi himself spent the next seven years in London.

355 Giovanni Palazzi is the suggested librettist in several reference works, but Matteo Zanetti is named by Gradenigo, who also identifies
the composer as Sebastiano Scolari. See the next note.

356 Gradenigo in GDN, I, f. 18v writes: 22. Gennaro. Nel Teatro di S. Cassano ando in scena I' opera intitolata iJ Velo d'Oro composta da
Matteo Zanetti e la musica di Sebastiano Scollari, con intermezzo detto il Conte Schizza; ma non piacqui I' opera, cioe la musica, et il suddetto
maestro anche per latrato [?, alt. altro] e anche spari.

357 The attribution is from Sonneck, whose information is often inaccurate.

518

OOo

1749/4

V1

fy
a)

Fr)

 1749a
1749/5

1

rs)


A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Anagilda is a stage name for Sancia (Livia Segantini), the daughter of the king of Navarre. After
her brother Garcia (Caterina Baratti) ascended the throne, he lured Fernando, the count of Castile (Anna
Bastiglia), into a trap by offering him his sister's hand in marriage. Elements of the plot can be traced
back to Silvani's La forza della virtii (1692/8). This version, however, contains roles only for those
named plus Elvira (Rodegonda Travaglia), a fictional sister of Garcia. The action takes place at the
border of Navarre and Castile.

The title-page is dated Carnovale 1749, but a specific date of opening is elusive. Groppo's placement
suggests that it occupied a fairly late position in the 1748-49 cycle. Although the text was later well
received in settings by Sarti (1758) and Scalabrini (1772), this production was unsuccessful and probably
met an early demise. The intermezzi, based on new texts by Goldoni and set to music by Ciampi, may
have fared better.>**

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 864; Wiel 515; Alm 1034

La commedia in commedia Music by Rinaldo di Capua
[THE COMEDY WITHIN THE COMEDY]

A dramma giocoso per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Barlocci*
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With J/ conte di Belfiore SORTING DATE: 1749-02-02

Without dedicatee

This was a modified version of L ambizione delusa (Rome, 1738; Venice, 1744/12). It had been given
under the alternative title La Nobilia in Verona in 1748. The number of characters was reduced from
eight to seven. La commedia opened on 2 February 1749 (GD),**! with Pandolfo's address to the elderly
widower Signor Marchione. Only Francesco Baglioni (Marchione) survived from the earlier cast, which
now included Catterina Pillaia (Nobilia) and Giuseppe Giardini (Pandolfo).

No musical sources known*

Listed as Groppo 863; Wiel 509; Alm 1032%

Demetrio. Cf. Suppl. 9.

Leucippo Music by Johann Adolf Hasse
[LEUKIPPOS]

A favola pastorale per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Claudio Pasquini
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1749-05-14
Without dedicatee

In this involved Arcadian plot, Leukippos (Giovanni Carestini) is taken as an infant from his father,
Naretes (Ottavio Albuzio)  a priest in the temple of Diana  and is raised as Aristaios. His love in
adulthood for Daphne (Teresa Albuzio) completely defeats the intentions of the jealous Delios (Niccole

358 Ortolani, TO, x, 1245.

35 Though not on good authority. Groppo (MS, p. 295) suggests Luchesini (first name unknown). Wiel (Zeatri, p. 174), citing Allacci, says
the text was derived from a comedy by Cosimo Antonio Pelli. One might also consider Francesco Vaneschi's like-named text, set by Giovanni
Chintzer (Florence, 1731). Pandolfo had become a ubiquitous character (see, for example, 1745/7).

36 Attributed to Barlocci in Groppo MS, p. 276. La commedia in commedia was also the title of an anonymous scenario circulating among
comedy troupes (Cotticelli et al., Commedie, pp. 401ff).

36! The date seems unlikely, since it coincides with the feast of Santa Maria Formosa. A more likely date would be 3 February.

3 However, Favourite Songs from the work, attributed to Latilla, were published by Walsh (London, c. 1748).
38 Misprinted as 1132.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 519

Conti) at the time of the abduction. The Venetian production of Leucippo opened on 14 May 1749 (PV),
when the work was enthusiastically received (PV). Its premiere had been given in Hubertusburg on
7 October 1747. An untitled libretto for its balli was published separately. Permission to allow the theaters
to open for the fair of Ascension in 1749 passed by only one vote.* Yet all three works produced during
this short season were well attended and well received (PV).

A Scores in B-Br (Dresden); D-DIb (Hubertusburg, 1747); arias in F-Pn; GB-Lbl; I-Ve
Listed as Groppo 865; Wiel 516; Alm 1035, 1036

1749/6 Tra due litiganti il terzo gode Music attributed to Gio. Battista Pescetti
[WHEN Two LITIGANTS FIGHT, THE OBSERVER ENJOYS IT]
A dramma giocoso Text attributed to Giovanni Battista Lorenzi*
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With L impresario dell'isole Canarie; a coro; balli' SORTING DATE: 1749-05-14
& Without dedicatee
Oo The background of this plot is loosely connected with that of La finta frascatana (1748, Suppl. 1). The

aged Pandolfo, who owns a villa in Frascati, has willed his estate to two friends  the poor young
gentlewoman Rosmene (Orsola Strambi), who loves the Milanese gentleman Valerio (Giuseppe
Manfredini), and the rich old Gerondo (Marc' Antonio Mareschi), who loves the gardener Lesbina
(Annonciata Garrani). Tra due litiganti opened on 14 May 1749 (A), when all three Ascension
operas brought full pleasure and were well attended (PV). The premiere performance of this work
appears to have been given in Vicenza in 1746.* Sarti's setting of the text was to be phenomenally
popular in the 1780s and 1790s.
A Aria in I-Ve
Listed as Groppo 866; Wiel 510; Alm 1037

1749/7 L'Arcadia in Brenta Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi
[ARCADIA ON THE RIVER BRENTA]
A dramma comico per musica Text attributed to Carlo Goldoni
Performed at Sant' Angelo*! SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1749-05-14

Without dedicatee

The Arcadian society depicted in this satire on villeggiatura valued witty words, facetious sayings,
spirited news, canzonettes, madrigals, and similar fare in its joyous academies. The impoverished

@>

56 Also in GDN, I, f. 33.

365 GDN, I, f. 21, entry of 6 Febraro, Proposta in Cons. di X.ci [Dieci] la parte di permettere di fare l'opera in S. Samuele nella futura Assenza
conforme |' introdutione di alcuni anni in qua, doppo varie pendenze passo di un Voto.

36 According to NGDMM/2. But a work called Gerondo by Goldoni was, according to Antonio Zatta (1794), written in 1749. Ortolani (TO,
xii, 1193) thinks it was written even earlier. Gerondo was later set to music by Tomaso Traetta.

36 ibretti for the balli  one in luogo boscoso and one in un interno  were published separately.

368 Sarti's later work of the same title (1782) is held by Ortolani (TO, xi, 1280) to have been derived from Goldoni's Le nozze (1755; see listing
for 1757 in Suppl. 2b).

3 Also GDN, I, f. 33; PV.

3 Following Stieger (Opernlexikon, i, 480), who lists it under Fra.... Sartori has no listing for such a performance under either Fra or
Tra,

31! Wiel (Teatri, p. 177, following Groppo's MS, p. 296) says it was also given at San Moise during the same year, but there is no confirmation
of this. He points out that the libretto for Sant' Angelo was published in Ferrara. Alm (Catalog, p. 667, extrapolating from Groppo MS, pp.
296f) says that US-LAu 1040 should be a libretto printed in Crema for the autumn 1749 S, Moise season, when L Arcadia in Brenta and
Il negligente (US-LAu 1039] each ran for two nights. She adds that 1040 is identical to US-LAu 1038.

520

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Fabrizio Fabroni da Fabriano (of great heart but little substance; a role taken by Francesco Baglioni)
is not accepted by six other members of the academy. Their comedy becomes his tragedy.

< _ L'Arcadia opened on 14 May 1749,> when it was well received (PV). Goldoni's text had first been
set by Ciampi (Bassano, autumn 1747). Giacomo Casanova remembered the work as one in which the
music was excellent and the actors very good. The finale of the second act (in which each
academician assumes one role in a commedia dell'arte), he said, was especially memorable.* Later
productions are cited with the autumn revival (1749/10). Regarding this first of many comic-opera
collaborations between Goldoni and Galuppi, it was Goldoni's claim that the work could be presented
with or without music.>
A Scores in B-Bc; I-MOe; arias in I-CF, US-BEm
Listed as Groppo 867; Wiel 517 (a); Alm 1038
 1749b La Pace. Cf. Suppl. Sa.
1749/8 Il finto principe Music by multiple composers
[THE MAKE-BELIEVE PRINCE]
A dramma comico per musica Text attributed to Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's?)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1749-11-01~
a Without dedicatee
The plot revolves around love-letters to three women  Rosmira (Angiola Sartori), Dorinda (Giovanna
Roddi), and Lesbina (Annonciata Garrani). All the letters are ultimately discovered to have been written
by Floro, who passed himself off as Ferrante (Costantino Compassi), the prince of Belpoggio.
ee Il finto principe appears to have preceded J/ protettore alla moda and is likely to have opened during
the St. Luke's period, possibly earlier than the tentative date given here. The work was denigrated by
Ortolani, who, calling it a drammetto (barely a drama), suggests that its musical content consisted simply
ofacollection of arias from other works. The text is accepted uneasily as that of Goldoni on the strength
of its inclusion in eighteenth-century anthologies, some of them posthumous. A resetting of the text
(Bologna, 1768; Florence, 1775) is (dubiously) attributed to Paisiello.
A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 870; Wiel 505; Alm 1041
1749/9 Il negligente Music by Vincenzo Ciampi
[THE NEGLIGENT FATHER]
A dramma comico per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1749-11-11~
e Without dedicatee
The rich but negligent Filiberto (Alessandro Renda) has in his house in Sorrento a legitimate daughter
of marriageable age, Lisaura (Dionisia Lepri), as well as an adopted daughter, Aurelia (Serafina Penni),
and a servant, Porporina (Costanza Rossignuoli), who aspires to marry well. Suitors are attracted
to those in inappropriate social stations.
3? GDN, I, f. 33.
3 Casanova, Memoires, iii, 4.

> Ortolani, TO, x, 1273. However, the note to the gentilissimo reader says, Io dunque per argomento della mia presente operetta non prendo
gia l' Arcadia in Brenta, che scritta trovasi dal nostro autore [ = Sagredo], poiche in essa materia non trovo per una teatrale rappresentazione.

35 Ortolani, TO, x, 1288f. By the 1760s the phenomenon of opera performances which amounted to recitals was known. Ortolani's source

here is unknown

3% Ortolani (TO, x, 1

287) cites Dufresny's Le Negligent (1692) as a possible source of inspiration.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 521

CO Il negligente was given in alternation with the autumn revival of L'Arcadia in Brenta (1749/10). Each
had only two performances.*' The work was produced in London in 1750 and (as I/ trascurato) in Lodi
in 1751. Despite the brevity of its Venetian run, // negligente was noted (particularly in London) for
its stellar cast and for its tumultuous finales, traceable to musical intermezzi and improvised theater.>
The Act-Two finale brought the whole cast to the stage and paired the voices two-by-two before
proceeding to the closing quartet, Che rabbia mi sento! In addition to several revivals of Ciampi's
work, Goldoni's text was reset by Paisiello for performance in Parma (1764).

fi Arias in D-Wa;? Favourite Songs (London, 1750).

Listed as Groppo 868; Wiel 513; Alm 1039

1749/10 L'Arcadia in Brenta Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi
[ARCADIA ON THE RIVER BRENTA]
A dramma comico per musica Text attributed to Carlo Goldoni
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1749-11-13~
rs Without dedicatee

@< This revival of 1749/7 ran for two nights in alternation with J/ negligente (1749/9).*' Casanova's
recollections of the work (see 1749/7) could have been based on this autumn revival at San Moise.**?
Among the many other productions mounted in the 1750s and 60s, this one was given in Como in 1765
under the title La nuova Arcadia. New productions continued through 1780, in several cases with music
by other composers.

fi Scores in B-Bc; I-MOe; arias in I-CF, US-BEm
Listed as Groppo 869; Wiel 517 (b);* Alm 1040

1749/11 Ciro riconosciuto Music by Niccole Jommelli
[CYRUS RECOGNIZED]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
"4 Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1749-11-15
a Without dedicatee

OO Metastasio's text, first set by Araya (Rome, 1730), had also been the subject of Galuppi's work (1737/1).
Jommelli's own setting had had its first performance in Bologna in 1744.* An untitled libretto for
a ballo for this production was published separately. The Venetian production opened on 15 November
1749 (GD). Ina letter to Carlo Broschi (Farinelli), Metastasio wrote of Jommelli, He has surprised
me. I have found in him all the harmony of the Saxon [Hasse], all the grace, all the expression, and

37' Ortolani (TO, x, 1287) claims that they shared one aria.

38 Ortolani (TO, x, 1287).

3 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 855.

38 The indication by Ortolani (TO, x, 1287) of a surviving partitura in London cannot be verified. Possibly he referred to the anthology of
Favourite Songs.

38! Groppo MS, p. 297.

382

In October 1749 Goldoni's comedy La vedova scaltra was playing at Sant'Angelo (GDN, I, f. 50).

38 Wiel (Teatri, p. 177) acknowledges the revival but does not give a separate listing for this production. Alm (Catalog, p. 667) points out
that the libretto for Sant' Angelo was published in Ferrara, but the San Moise libretto was published in Crema (for performance in Venice);
she adds that US-LAu 1040 is identical to US-LAu 1038, despite different places of publication and different venues. Ortolani (TO, x, 1231)
notes that productions of L Arcadia in Brenta were given in Crema in September and at San Moise in the following autumn. Miggiani's research
shows a connection between San Moise and the theater in Crema through the travels of the Mingotti troupe.

38 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 247.

522

1749/12

m1

rs)
@

1749/13

1749/14

mM

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

all the fecundity of Vinci.3* Gioacchino Conti sang in the title role, with Domenico Panzacchi (Astiage),
Domenica Casarini (Mandane), and Stefano Leonardi (Cambise).

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 871; Wiel 511; Alm 1042

Il protettore alla moda Music attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini,
(THE STYLISH PROTECTOR] rev. Baldassare Galuppi et al.
A dramma comico Text attributed to Giuseppe Maria Buini
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1749-11-29~
Without dedicatee

This revival of 1747/9 was subject to minor changes in the number of scenes. Annonciata Garrani
(Diacinta), Costantino Compassi (Monsu Voragine), and Felice Novelli (Saltobello) were retained from
the earlier cast. Because the impresario ran away, the production closed after six performances. The
theater remained closed until 10 January 1750.* These disclosures provide the only basis from which
an approximate date can be inferred.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 872; Wiel 506; Alm 1043

Siroe Music by Gioacchino Cocchi**
[SIROES]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
Given with balli SORTING DATE: 1749-12-26
Without dedicatee

This production of Siroe opened on 26 December 1749.**8 Gioacchino Conti (Egiziello) now sang
in the title role, with Domenico Panzacchi (Cosroe), Stefano Leonardi (Medarse), and Domenica Casarini
(Emira). Metastasio's text had been set previously as 1726/2, 1731/6, and 1743/4.

Arias in I-Nc, Ve, Vme

Listed as Groppo 873; Wiel 522; Alm 1045

Arcifanfano, re dei matti Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi*TM
[ARCIFANFANO, KING OF THE MADMEN]

A dramma comico per musica Text attributed to Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1749-12-27

3 Mancini et al., Teatri, i/2, p. 84, citing a letter of 12 Novembre 1749 in Metastasio's correspondence.
38 Groppo MS, p. 295.

387 Cocchi (1712-96) assumed the position of maestro di coro at the Incurabili after Ciampi's move to London, which preceded this production
by some months. Cocchi's training was in Naples but early lexicographers reported him to be Paduan.

388 GDN, I, p. 56v.

38 Ortolani (TO, x, 1291) suggests that the music was of necessity a pastiche, since Galuppi was busy finishing the score for // mondo della

luna.

GOO

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1740-49) 523

Without dedicatee

The text was purportedly derived from the earlier comedies 1 ligamatti (1675) and II castigamatti (1695,
both listed in Suppl. 3a) by don Domenico Balbi.* The literal meaning of the name Arcifanfano was
old beak, figuratively meaning someone of vituperous attitude. In this particular case the term implied
vanity unsuited to one's station in life. Each mad person had a character flaw of a different kind (too
greedy, too euphoric, too shy, too angry, too happy). A notable role was that of Bad Government (Mal
Governo, sung by Berenice Penni), who was given to extravagance. Francesco Baglioni sang in the
title role.

Arcifanfano opened on 26 or 27 December 1749.*"' The title-page indication is Carnovale 1750.
A libretto for a ballo with the same title as the opera was published separately. Theatrical dance seems
to have been satirized in this work: the two existing balli are presented respectively (1) by madmen
and madwomen and (2) by the king of the lunatics, who introduces the maestro di ballo Persignach.*
Textual critics claim that the libretto suffered on account of the music. Tettings by Duni (as L Isle des
foux, 1760), Scolari (Lisbon, 1768), and Dittersdorf (Esterhazy, 1776) were better received.* The work
was revived in Venice as 1750/10 and again in 1755 (Suppl. 2d), now with somewhat altered music.
Surviving overture (Venice, 1759) in I-MAav; arias in I-CF, Tf

Listed as Groppo 878; Wiel 525; Alm 1050

3% All these works may contain vestiges of a commedia dell'arte called L ospedale de pazzi. A scenario for it can be found in Cotticelli et

al., Commedie, pp. 165-68.

3! Ortolani (TO, x, 1291) gives the first, GO the second.

3 Persignach is the analogue of Monsieur di Porsugnacco (Grilletta e Porsugnacco; cf. Supp. 4a). Both like the minuet.
33 See Ortolani, TO, x, 1293. Ortolani was not aware of Dittersdorf's setting (modern edn. by P. Laki, Budapest, 1982).

The 1750s: An Overview

WEN asparo Gozzi, the quintessential Venetian nobleman
eG of his time, was highly literate but his fortunes
SE were rapidly deteriorating. His family was mired
in unending property disputes. In league with his learned
wife, Luisa Bergalli, Gozzi attempted to rescue the struggling
Teatro Sant' Angelo in 1747-48 by assuming its management.
The arrangement soon failed; Sant' Angelo was converted
into a comedy house. Girolamo Medebach succeeded the
Gozzi, and he in turn engaged Carlo Goldoni (1748-49) to
write fully scripted comedies. For the theater it was a bright
new beginning. For the dramma per musica it was a turning
point. The audience response to Goldoni, after its preceding
year under the Gozzi, was so striking that Sant' Angelo
signed Goldoni on to a four-year contract in March 1749.
For an annual salary of 450 ducats, he was to provide eight
comedies, two theatrical works, and miscellaneous
adaptations each year. This ratio became the norm for other
theaters. It significantly altered the balance of power between
opera and comedy.

Goldoni's advertised reform of comedy precipitated a
pamphlet war which began as soon as these contracted works
began, in the autumn of 1749. The rivalry between Goldoni
and his nemisis, Pietro Chiari, which grew more bitter every
year, did not peak until 1760. Milestones of Goldoni's reform
included such works as // teatro comico (1750), which was
more a tract than a drama, and his adaptation of Richardson's
Pamela (also 1750; Suppl. 2c), which was the first spoken
play to be performed in Venice without masks. Goldoni's
discontents at Sant' Angelo led him to move to San Salvatore
in 1753 on a ten-year contract. It offered him 600 ducats a
year for the same number of works per year. Medebach
responded to Goldoni's abandonment by hiring Chiari at
Sant' Angelo.

A legal dispute between Medebach and Goldoni's
publisher, Bettinelli, clouded three theatrical years, from the
autumn of 1753 until Lent 1756. The rush to print comedies
was itself'a novelty, since until the later 1730s the ephemeral
scenari which were scribbled on paper and posted in the
wings of theaters had been considered adequate. The
subtleties of character and language in the social satires of
Goldoni and some of his contemporaries were such that
utmost care in dress, language, and gesture was required in

portrayals. The bitter insults which increasingly flew
between Chiari, Goldoni, and occasionally the Gozzi
engaged public interest and thereby increased the readership
of printed editions. Goldoni, who seemed to find personal
advantage in every adversity, enjoyed the friendship of
Venice's leaders. Before abandoning Venice for Paris (1762),
he dedicated a collected edition of his works to the doge
Francesco Loredan.

San Giovanni Grisostomo's brief accommodation of
comedians (1747-48) coincided with Gozzi's short tenure
at Sant'Angelo. The rebuilt San Samuele, which recalled
its displaced comedy troupe in 1748, was a showplace of
unprecedented grandeur. Crystals sets and chandeliers
completed its stunning interior in 1753. The theater began
to charge admission for daytime tours of its premises. Now
that comedy had taken on a life of its own, San Samuele
suddenly chose to become a venue for opera. It was a roost
not for the dramma per musica but rather for the collabora-
tions of Goldoni and a native son, Baldassare Galuppi. In
1753, San Samuele's comedy troupe resettled in Lisbon.

At the end of 1755 a new opera house for the nobility,
San Benedetto, was opened as a home for the dramma per
musica, but it was not destined to attract rave reviews. In
keeping with its emphasis on serious opera, its period of
operation was largely limited to the winter. Its main support
came from noblewomen who were friends of Pisana Giustin-
ian Lolin, the wife of Michele Grimani (long associated with
San Samuele), who was San Benedetto's manager. Although
gutted by fire in 1776, the theater was rebuilt and survived
into the nineteenth century.

Figure 28 compares opera productions by theater in the
1740s and 1750s. Figure 29 compares opera and comedy
productions within the 1750s. What may seem to have been
evenhanded treatment of comedy and opera at San Moise
in Figure 29 was not that at all. A turbulent period of
experimentation, involving the production ofa large number
of titles, was followed by another of lassitude. Finding
himself called to alien states in 1752, Angelo Mingotti
sublet the theater but also collected rents from a caffe on its
premises.

Increasingly Venice drew only composers in the early
stages of their careers. It experienced difficulty it retaining

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1750-59)

525

30 i

0 Sant'Angelo

|
O San Cassiano
| @ San Gio. Grisostomo

@ San Moise |
@ San Salvatore |

FIGURE 28. Productions by theater, 1740s vs. 1750s.

@ San Samuele |
@ Other |

0 Sant'Angelo |
San Cassiano

@ San Gio. Grisostomo

San Moise

@ San Salvatore

@ San Samuele |
@ Other

Comedies

Operas

FIGURE 29. Productions by genre in the 1750s.

indigenous ones if they achieved success. Theatrical op-
portunities abounded in Central and Eastern Europe, in
Denmark and Sweden, and in the British Isles. Giuseppe
Sarti, best known for his later activities in Russia, made a
Venetian debut at the end of 1752. Gioacchino Cocchi was
perhaps the one composer of the time who remained fixed
in Venice (his works were performed at San Samuele, San
Salvatore, and San Cassiano). Giuseppe Scolari, Giuseppe
Scarlatti, and Floriano Gassmann forged links between
Venetian opera and the stages of Vienna and other cities to
the north and east. All three composers had commissions
at San Moise.

Despite Goldoni's tenure as a dramatist there, San
Salvatore produced more operas in the 1750s than it had in
recent decades. San Cassiano flourished less from the

proceeds of its stages than from those of gambling (and,
some claim, prostitution) in designated boxes. At least here,
the role of the theater as a space for dubious private pleasures
increasingly overshadowed its role as a place for the public
performance of drama.

In some respects, life on the squares of Venice competed
with offerings in its theaters. Ad hoc acrobatic shows,
juggling demonstrations, and displays of exotic animals filled
the Piazza at Carnival and during the Ascension fair.
Scientific ventures quenched the thirst for spectacle with
well-advertised demonstrations in theaters of anatomy and
astronomy. General admission was sometimes offered to
academies of music and painting. It was as if the splendors
of the stage had oozed out onto the walkways and canals
of Venice.

526

Financial incentives motivated these changes. In January
1754 the Council of Ten instituted a provision which
required opera impresari to provide a deposit of 3,000 (later
4,000) ducats in order to mount productions in the autumn-
winter cycle. Spring productions were treated separately and
required a deposit of 2,000 ducats. It seemed to be a matter
of slight concern that many of these productions were weary
repetitions (and outright travesties) of earlier ones.

Opere buffe and comedies remained popular to the extent
that they were performed well, though once Goldoni left the
city, there was considerably less public discussion about
prose theater. The Gozzi continued to innovate, particularly
through their explorations of folklore, both local and exotic.
Yet obstacles at the institutional level seemed increasingly
insurmountable. The Most Serene Republic had ruled the

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Adriatic for most of a millennium, but its ruling city was
ruinously underfunded. The short-term solution of selling
off its antiquities, one trophy at a time, was demoralizing.
Yet it met with an enthusiastic response from the bourgeois
travelers, who patronized the new markets of collectibles
such as musical scores and instruments. In the steadily more
European Venice which was emerging, the culture of print
began to serve the market for news in 1760, when Gasparo
Gozzi's Gazzetta veneta appeared. In the same year his
brother, Carlo, attempted to revive improvised comedy.
Venice, however, was poised for its final breakdown. The
theater, dissociated from the fabric of indigenous personal
and civic life, withered.

The 1750s: Chronology

1750/1

Alcimena, principessa dell'isole fortunate,
ossia L'amore fortunato ne' suoi disprezzi'

Music by Baldassare Galuppi

[ALCIMENA, PRINCESS OF THE FORTUNATE ISLES, OR LOVE FORTUNATE IN ITS SCORN]

A dramma per musica
Performed at San Cassiano

Text adapted from Moliere by Pietro Chiari
SEASON: Winter (Carnival)

With I! ciarlatano fortunato nelle sue imposture; Il ladro convertito per amore; balli

Without dedicatee

Op,

SORTING DATE: 1750-01-10~

Intent on finding a husband, Alcimena (Maddalena Ferrandini), the princess of the Fortunate Isles, invited

anumber of worthy candidates to her court to participate in various races, tournaments, and hunts. Among
the candidates were Fochino (Sebastiano Emiliani), the prince of China; Taiko-sama? (Giuseppe Rossi),
the prince of Japan; and Diomiro (Antonio Amati), the prince of Liliput.* They had seven days to prove
themselves.' An untitled libretto for a ballo was published separately. Stieger and other sources give
the opening date as 26 December 1749, but it is unconfirmed and probably incorrect. After six recitations
of II protettore alla moda (1749/12), San Cassiano was closed. It reopened on 10 January 1750, when

anew work, apparently this one, opened.
No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 875; Wiel 519; Alm 1047

'ie., Livietta e Tracollo.

? The historical Toyotomi Hideyoshi, whose title as conqueror was Taiko-sama, led a revolt against Portuguese Jesuits in Nagasaki in 1587.
He played a continuing role in anti-Christian activities. The Japanese word taiko (drum) had diverse symbolic meanings in Japanese

ceremonial life. The ending -sama conferred respect.

3 The allegorical land of midgets in Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels (London, 1726).

4 Further on the libretto, see Anna Laura Bellina, Dalla Principessa Alcimena' al Marchese Villano': La questione dei generi del libretto
per musica in Pietro Chiari e il teatro europeo del Settecento (Vicenza: Neri Pozza, 1986), 225-34.

5 e.g., Dale E. Monson in GO (ii, 340); Stieger, Opernlexikon, i/1, 32.
 Groppo MS, p. 295.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1750-59) 527

1750/2 Artaserse Music by Antonio Gaetano Pampani
[ARTAXERXES]
A dramma per musica Text derived from Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1750-01-24
ia) Without dedicatee
Oo@ This production of Artaserse opened on 24 January 1750.' On 10 February, the last night of Carnival,

the performance began at 22:00 [O.V.] and finished at 1:00. The theater was magnificently illuminated.*
The work met with universal applause. Stefano Leonardi was cast in the lead role with Domenica
Casarini (Mandane), Domenico Panzacchi (Artabano), and Gioacchino Conti (Arbace). Musical settings
of this perennially popular text had been performed in Venice as 1730/7 (Hasse), 1734/3 (Hasse), 1742/5
(Paganelli), 1744/3 (Terradellas), and 1746/3 (Abbos). Its popularity peaked between 1745 and 1755.
Pampani's own setting (Artaserse Longimano) had been given as 1737/5.
A Arias in GB-Lbl; I-Maav, MOe, Nec, Ve
Listed as Groppo 876; Wiel 523; Alm 1048

1750/3 Il mondo della luna Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi
[A TRIP TO THE Moon]
A dramma giocoso per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli' SORTING DATE: 1750-01-29
& Without dedicatee

The text was inspired by Cyrano de Bergerac's Voyage dans la lune'' (1650), with accretions from
the comedy Arlecchino imperatore nella luna (Paris, 1684).'? The false astrologer Ecclitico'' (Alessandro
Renda) deludes Buona Fede (Francesco Baglioni) into believing he has been transported to the moon
by staging various fantasy scenes after dark in the garden of his house. On stage, the spaceship is pulled
by two ponies.

Ow Il mondo della luna opened on 29 January 1750."* It was revived at San Cassiano for the last three days
of Carnival 1751 (Supplement 5b). Both balli, choreographed by Domenico Minelli, were substantial.
In the first, a transparent globe (representing the moon) was observed by an astrologer, who attributed
great significance to it. The moon then opened to reveal two lunar men and two lunar women.

o The text was phenomenally popular. In addition to Galuppi's setting, which was in use through 1760,
music was also written by Piccinni (Milan, 1770), Haydn (as Die Welt aufdem Monde, Esterhazy, for
a royal wedding in the summer of 1777), and Paisiello (as // credulo deluso, Naples, 1774; under the
original title, St. Petersburg, 1783). There were also productions in Lisbon (1765, 1791).

7 GDN, I, f. 61, where it is cited as Artaserse, Filio di Xerses Re di Persia.

 GDN, I, f. 63v, entry of 10 [Febraro] in 1749 M.V. Febraro dell'Anno Santo.

 Groppo MS, p. 299.

' A separate libretto was published for the second-act allo, entitled L 'incoronazione di Diana sposata a Endimione.

"' De Bergerac's work (Voyage dans la lune et histoire comique des etats et empires du sole) was a more comprehensive satire which drew
on names from mythology, antiquity, and Renaissance astronomers to characterize modern politics.

" See Andrea della Corte, L opera comica italiana nel 700 (Bari, 1924). Ortolani (TO, x, 1290) notes a resemblance also with certain scenari,
such as that for Truffaldino ubriaco.

' The astronomical term ecliptic refers to the geometric plane of the orbit of the earth. It is usually imagined as a great circle on which lie
endpoints representing the summer and winter solstices and midpoints representing equinoxes. At the time this text was written, the
discrepancy between the 365.25 days in a year and the 360 degrees of a geometrical circle was of interest to those involved in the reform of
timekeeping. Meanwhile, the false astrologer had a prototype in a commedia scenario, Il finto astrologo (Cotticelli et al.,Commedie, pp. 421 ff).

4 Date reported in GO and NGDMM/2 by Dale Monson.

528

1750/4
rm

1750/5

mM

[2
- 08

1750/6

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Scores in D-Dlb, W; F-Pc; GB-Lbl, Lem; I-Gl; US-We!
Listed as Groppo 874; Wiel 526; Alm 1046

Ernelinda Music attributed to Francesco Gasparini and Antonio Vivaldi,
[ERNELINDA] rev. Baldassare Galuppi
A dramma per musica Text adapted from Francesco Silvani
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival?)
With La preziosa ridicola' and balli SORTING DATE: 1750-01-31~
Without dedicatee

This text, revised and abbreviated from La fede tradita e vendicata, had been set by Gasparini (1704/1,
1715/7) and Vivaldi (1726/3). The cast included Maddalena Ferrandini (Ernelinda), Sebastiano Emiliani
(Ricimero), and Costantino Compassi (Rodoaldo). The relative position of this work in the winter season
is clear, but no exact date of opening has been found. Ernelinda cannot have fared well in competition
with J] mondo della luna.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 877; Wiel 520; Alm 1049; Ryom Anh. 45

Imeneo in Atene Music by Domenico (Domingo) Terradellas
[HYMENAEUS IN ATHENS]

A componimento drammatico Text derived from Silvio Stampiglia
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With L 'uccellatrice; balli SORTING DATE: 1750-05-06
Without dedicatee

Terradellas's setting of Stampiglia's text stood between those of Porpora (1726/7) and Jommelli
(Ludwigsburg, 1765).' Jmeneo should have opened on 6 May 1750, but the Council of Ten's injunction
against the Ascension opera season may account for the designation componimento drammatico. A
concert (or private) performance without staging, which is what is implied, could have enabled the work
to circumvent the restrictions. Pasqualino Potenza sang as the youthful Hymenaeus/Imeneo with
Maddalena Parigi as Rosmene.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 879; Wiel 528; Alm 1051

Amore in tarantola Music by Gaetano Latilla
[MARRIAGE DETERMINED BY THE LUCK OF THE DRAW]

A dramma giocoso per musica Text attributed to Carlo Vaccini
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1750-11-13
Without dedicatee

Silvio, the marquis of Castel Verde (Cattarina Flavis), was the tutor of two sisters. Lucinda (Vittoria
Querzoli), who feigned blindness, was the heiress to a monetary fortune. Camilla (Teresa Chiarini),
who feigned deafness, was the heiress to lands in Puglia. The first sister fell in love with Silvio and
the second with Ernesto (Catterina Tedeschi), the baron of Sinopoli. Meanwhile, Balsamino (Alessandro
Renda) was supposed to choose which sister to marry. As the work opens, Balsamino is seated with

'S Ortolani (TO, x, 1291) judges that the texts of the songs published by Walsh as Favourite Songs from this work are not by Goldoni, and
also that the music in the same print may not be by Galuppi.

" Or Madama Dulcinea [here changed to Giandina] e il cuoco. These intermezzi were first performed with what was essentially the same
opera in Rome in 1712!

"' Stieger, Opernlexikon, i/2, 609.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1750-59) 529

Cuccamondo (Francesco Carrattolli), posing as a chemist, at a gambling table. Balsamino is trying to
determine from his cards whether he is destined to marry the blind sister, represented by a card showing
astallion (amor in stellione), or the deaf sister, represented by a card showing a large, furry spider (amor
in tarantola). A separate libretto was published for the ballo in the woods (in luogo boscoso).
O@E Amore in tarantola, which opened on 13 November 1750,'* had a poor reception because neither the
poetry nor the intreccio found favor with the audience.' The witty text generated some short vocal
ensembles (including one for four voices near the end of the work) which, though rare at the time,
anticipated tastes of the future. The theater's rent had increased from 550 to 650 ducats a year in 1750.
A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 881; Wiel 524;77 Alm 1053

1750/7 Il mondo alla roversa

o sia Le donne che comandano Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi
[THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN, OR WOMEN IN POWER]
A dramma bernesco per musica Text attributed to Carlo Goldoni
im Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1750-11-14
& Without dedicatee

The concept of a world ruled by women was originally meant to represent the realities of modern
European politics. The first half of the eighteenth century had brought Queen Anne to the throne of
England, Elisabetta Farnese to that of Spain, and Maria Theresia to that of Austria. With respect to
stage works, however, Ortolani calls attention to the long tradition of female warriors (amazzoni) in
Italian works and works from antiquity, such as Aristophanes' Lysistrata. In the splendor of their court,
on an imaginary island in the Antipodes, the women have an exhilarating life in which all activities
are tailored for their benefit. Mocking Roman triumph scenes, the triumphal carriage in which the women
arrive is pulled by a chained group of men. Masculine spoils decorate the atrium in which the work
opens. A council composed entirely of women is convened in Act Two. Trumpets and timpani play
as the women prepared for combat.
CO II mondo, which had a cast of seven singers and ten dancers, opened on 14 November 1750. It enjoyed
universal applause. The performers included Serafina Penni (Cintia), Agata Sani (Tulia), and
Annunciata Manzi (Aurora). Goldoni's text was later set by Paisiello for performance in Florence
(1764).?
A Scores in A-Wgm; B-Bc (Venice, 1752); D-Dlb, DS; F-Pc (Dresden, 1755); GB-Lbl, Lem; I-MAav,
MOe, TLp, Vlevi; US-We; arias in US-BEm, Cai, NYp

Listed as Groppo 882; Wiel 518; Alm 1054

' GDN, I, f. 91v.

' Groppo MS, p. 300, but there appears to be a missing word in his entry Ne per la poesia, ne per |'intrezio questo drama non ha incontrato

[applauso].

20 Maggiani, Sulle tracce della troupe Mingotti.

?! Wiel (Teatri, p. 180) has misnumbered the work 424.

?2 Also known as I! regno delle donne.

3 Ortolani (TO, x, 1303f) makes this observation.

4 Ortolani, TO, x, 1303.

25 Its libretto was merely dated Novembre 1750. See GDN, I, f. 91. Stieger (Opernlexikon, i/2, 825) says the work had also been given on
29 January 1750. He has confused the title either with // mondo della luna (1750/3), a production of which opened at San Moise on that date,
or with the pastiche Ernelinda (1750/4), which was produced at San Cassiano during the winter.

?6 Groppo MS, p. 300, Questo bernesco Drama ha incontrato I'applauso universale.

27 It is sometimes claimed to have been the model for Goldoni's Le donne curiose, revised for Wolf-Ferrari's Die neugierigen Frauen
(Munich, 1903), but Le donne is a more generic satire on women's suspicions of their husbands' social and intellectual activities.

530 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1750/8 Merope Music by David PerezTM
[MEROPE]
A dramma per musica Text attributed to Apostolo Zeno
I Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1750-11-19
az Without dedicatee

OOw This production of Merope opened on 19 November 1750. In it Giovanna Cesatti sang in the title role
with Gaetano Majorana (Caffariello) as her son (Epitide), Gaetano Ottani (Polifonte), and Pietro Serafini
(Erasimede). Zeno's libretto had first been set to music by Gasparini as 1712/1. One of Zeno's most
enduring texts, it had also been the basis of operas composed by Giacomelli (1734), Vivaldi (as L oraco-
1o in Messenia, 1737/10), and Jommelli (1741/6). Gassmann's setting was given at San Moise in 1757.
Outside Venice, Merope was also set by such composers as Giuseppe Scarlatti (Rome, 1740) and Tomaso
Traetta (Milan, 1776). It was last heard in a setting by M. A. Portogallo (Lisbon, 1804).

fi Sinfonia in I-Vlevi
Listed as Groppo 883; Wiel 521; Alm 1055

1750/9 Il paese della Cuccagna Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi
[THE LAND OF CUCCAGNA]
A commedia per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Andrew's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1750-12-01
& Without dedicatee
 In the fabulous land of Cuccagna, where there is universal abundance, the simple-minded Pandolino

(Francesco Baglioni) awaits the arrival of Pollastrina (Costanza Rossignoli) for their wedding. As the
work opens, he has just learned that the boat on which she was traveling has capsized. The governor
and various officials come to his rescue.* Apart from Orontes/Oronte, the characters in I] paese were
associated with intermezzi (e.g., Lardone, Pollastrina) or opere bernesche (e.g., Madama Cortese,
Madama Libera). The ballo given at the end of the work was a contradance introduced by instruments.

o II paese should have opened on 6 May 1750, but because the Council of Ten issued an injunction
against operas in the Ascension season of 1750, the production was deferred.TM In actuality it started
on 1 December 1750* and was concluded before Christmas. Groppo says it had a poor reception,
but the text remained in use through 1777.

28 Most of the previous operas of the Neapolitan composer Perez (1711-78) had been given in Palermo and most of his subsequent ones were
performed in Lisbon, where he spent the last decades of his life.

 GDN, |, f. 92.

3 Gradenigo's note (preceding citation) recalls that Majorana had also appeared (at the time with Carlo Broschi) in 1734/5 (Zeno's text,
Geminiani's music).

3! Ortolani (TO, x, 1300) traces its origin to le Grand's farce Le Roi de Cocagna (1718), but Ungarelli (Vocabolario, p. 93) notes the existence
of the concept (under the name Bengodi) reaching back to Boccaccio.

* Ortolani (TO, x, 1301) considered the work a satire on the excesses of Carnival.
* The 7th, reported by Dale Monson in GO, would have been the feast of Ascension itself.

34 GDN, I, f. 73, undated entry [after 9 Maggio 1750], Nella stagione della Sensa non furono permessi li teatri, e maschere conforme il solito
dalli Capi del Consiglio di X.

35 GDN, I, f. 96. Groppo (MS, p. 300) mentions the work only after citing Merope. Ortolani (TO, x, 1300) considers it to have opened for
Ascension and to have been revived in the autumn,

36 Groppo (MS, p. 299) regarded the December production as a revival from the preceding spring, but no evidence for its performance in the
spring seems to exist. The printing of the libretto would, however, have suggested a spring performance.

1750/10

mM

&o
bean)

1750/11

nO

1750/12

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1750-59) 531

No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 880; Wiel 527; Alm 1052

Arianna e Teseo" Music by Girolamo Abbos
[ARIADNE AND THESEUS]

A dramma per musica Text derived from Pietro Pariati
Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1750-12-26
Without dedicatee

Pariati's text had been set by Porpora in 1714 for Vienna and was produced in Venice as 1727/11.
Abbos's setting had been given in Rome in 1748.* This production opened on 26 December 1750.
The cast included Giovanna Cesatti (Arianna), Gaetano Majorana (7eseo), and Pietro Serafini (Alceste).
No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 884; Wiel 533; Alm 1057

Arcifanfano, re de' matti' Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi
[ARCIFANFANO, KING OF THE MADMEN]

A dramma comico Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1750-12-26
Without dedicatee

This revival of 1749/14 opened on 26 December 1750. Two roles were re-cast.
Overture (1759) in I-MAay; arias in I-CF, I-Tf
Listed as Groppo 886; Wiel 537; Alm 1059

La mascherata' Music attributed to Gioacchino Cocchi*!
[THE MASQUERADE]

A dramma comico per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1750-12-27

Dedicated to Carlo Filippo Cottone*

In this plot, which is rooted in the traditions of the commedia dell'arte, the Roman cavalier Silvio (Angela
Conti, known as La Taccarina) is engaged to Aurelia (Agata Sani), whose life is complicated by her
aunt, the widow Vittoria (Annunciata Manzi), and the unassuming silk-merchant Beltrame (Girolamo
Piani). The action, which takes place during the Carnival period in Milan, opens in Beltrame's silk factory.
The characters reveal their aspirations in the masks they assume for the Carnival promenade: Silvio
appears as Apollo, Aurelia as Daphne, Vittoria as a Florentine, Beltrame as a Neapolitan, his fashionable
wife Lucrezia as a Venetian, the witty scholar Menichino as a German, and Beltrame's friend Leandro

37 Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 97.

GDN, |, f. 96v.

* Loc. cit. Groppo (MS, p. 301) notes that the frontispiece of the libretto says it was given in the previous autumn [i.e., of 1750]; the previous
production had in fact opened one year earlier.

* The role of Mal Governo was switched from Berenice Penni to Cattarina Flavis, that of Madama Gloriosa from Dionisia Lepri to Catterina

Tedeschi.

" GO and Groppo attribute the work to Cocchi, who is also accepted by Ortolani (TO, x, 1304). Wiel attributes it to Galuppi, Stieger
(Opernlexikon, i/2, 786) to Galuppi and Cocchi.

 Prince of Castelnuovo and marquis of Altamira. The dedication does not appear in such libretti as that in US-LAu, but Goldoni's text
containing it is reproduced in Ortolani, TO, x, 911.

532 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

as a Frenchman who speaks a dialect (of French) corrupted by Italian. The ballo, for which a libretto
was published separately, involved ten dancers.

o La mascherata was first performed on 27 December 1750;** Goldoni's dedication was dated the 24th.
The printer's date was 1751. Although the work was not well received in Venice, it had a revival in
Trieste in 1757.

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 885; Wiel 531; Alm 1058

1751/1 L'opera in prova alla moda Music by Gaetano Latilla
[THE STYLISH OPERA REHEARSAL]
A dramma giocoso per musica Text attributed to Giovanni Fiorini
im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Given with balli SORTING DATE: 1751-01-23~
& Without dedicatee
e This satire on theatrical manners was populated by the maestro Calimodrio (Francesco Carattoli), four

virtuose, the poet Lirazza (Filippo Sedotti), and the head musician Semolino (Cattarina Flavis, called
La Guantarina). As the work opened, they were rehearsing the final scene of a music-drama called
Urganostocor (Suppl. 5b). All were beholden to Captain Saracca (Francesco Baglioni). According to
the libretto, the work was written in an evening by an Indian who lacked other ways of passing the
time.
 L'opera in prova must have opened in January 1751, perhaps around the 23rd. As a regular production,
it closed (with the end of Carnival) on 20 February. The first ballo involved so many scenes that they
were metered one per night at a designated point in Act One.** Urganostocor constituted the whole
of Act Three* and was performed (without the rest of the opera) on the last three nights of Carnival.
A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 887;* Wiel 535; Alm 1061

1751/2 Didone abbandonata Music by Gennaro Manna
[DIDO ABANDONED]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
im Performed at San Giovanni Grisostomo SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli and combattimenti SORTING DATE: 1751-01-30
& Without dedicatee
Oo The production based on this setting of Metastasio's well-loved text opened on 30 January 1751 (A,

PV). Giovanna Cesatti sang in the title role with Gaetano Majorana (Il Caffariello, here Aeneas) and
Gaetano Ottani (Jarba). The text, first set for Venice by Albinoni (1724/12), endured well into the

#8 Da francese, che parla italianato.

** Its full title was quoted in GDN, I, f. 96v as La Mascherata Naue detta Madonna del Lauro e S. Antonio di Padova, Capitano Pietro
Disposito, venuto da Terranova.

5 The choreographer was Francesco Fabris.

46 Wiel (Teatri, p. 185), relying on Allacci (Drammaturgia, col. 907), says that Urganostocor constituted the second of three azioni. While
the libretto allows for the possibility that the three azioni could be uncoupled for performance on separate evenings (Si avverte che siccome
il tempo non permitte, che intieramente in una sola sera s'adempia alla recita..., cosine andera distribuendo per ordine un'azione diversa della
susseguente composizione di sera in sera. . .terminandosi sempre tutte le sere col ballo terzo, che sara accompagnato dal coro.), Urganostocor
is unambiguously the third azione and the only item with a stand-alone libretto.

47 Groppo's 887 is the libretto for L opera in prova alla moda, given during the regular winter season. Groppo's 888, identified generically
as la continuazione dell'opera suddetta, is for the performance of Urganostocor at the end of Carnival. Sartori 6492 [ = Groppo 888]
identifies the work as an introduzione ad un festa di ballo, another component entertainment of the last night of Carnival.

1751/3

im

ra)


fi

1751a
 1751b

1751/4

1751/5

i

rs)

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1750-59) 533

nineteenth century. Among its later settings were those of Ferdinand Paer (1810), Saverio Mercadante
(1823), and K. G Reissiger (1824).*

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 889; Wiel 532; Alm 1063

Le donne vendicate Music attributed to Gioacchino Cocchi
[WOMEN VINDICATED]

A dramma giocoso per musica Text by Gioacchino Cocchi
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1751-01-30
Without dedicatee

This playful study of female character, set in Bologna, features four women (Doralice, Eleonora, Emilia,
and Livietta) and four men (Casimiro, Volpino, Flaminio, and Roccaforte). The women have allied
themselves against Volpino (Giovanni Leonardi). Roccaforte (Girolamo Piani) defends the women.
The balli were scored for ten dancers. Le donne vendicate was first performed on 30 January 1751 (A,
PV). For this production mirrors were mounted on the exterior of the theater boxes, creating an unusual
impression of space.' Piccinni's setting of the text was given in Rome in 1763.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 890; Wiel 530; Alm 1064

Il mondo della luna. Cf. Supplement 5b.

Urganostocor. Cf. Supplement 5b.

Demetrio Music by David Perez
[DEMETRIOS]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1751-05-19
Without dedicatee

Metastasio's text was familiar to Venetian audiences from the settings of Hasse (1732/3; 1737/2; 1746/14)
and Gluck (1742/4). Perez's own setting had had its premiere in Palermo ten years earlier. The text
remained in use into the late nineteenth century. Its last known setting was by Raffael Coppola (Turin,
1877). In the 1751 production, which opened on 19 May 1751 (PV), Colomba Mattei sang as Cleonike.
Arias in US-BEm, SFsc, We

Listed as Groppo 891; Wiel 540; Alm 1065

Statira Music by Francesco Maggiore et al.*
[STATEIRA]

A dramma per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at Sant' Angelo SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With ballo SORTING DATE: 1751-05-19
Without dedicatee

8 For an extensive list of productions, see Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 326.

* Groppo (MS, p. 302) writes, Con questo drama, resterono adornati esteriormente tutti li palchi de specchi, apparato tale, che avanza ogni

credenza.

5 Maggiore was identified here not only as a maestro di cappella from Naples but also as the direttore dell opera. The recitatives and some
of the arias were his; the remaining arias were selected by the singers.

534 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Saks) Goldoni's text, first set for this theater by Chiarini as 1741/3, although it is one ofhis few serious dramas,
found a reasonably favorable reception, as evidenced by this resetting. This production opened on 19
May 1751 (PV). Maria Camati now sang in the title role, with Giuseppe Gallieni (Arbace) and Elena
Fabris (Rosane).

A No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 892; Wiel 541; Alm 1066

1751/6 La pastorella al soglio Music by Gaetano Latilla
[THE SHEPHERDESS ON THE THRONE]
A dramma per musica Text by Giovanni Carlo Pagani-Cesa
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Spring (Ascension)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1751-05-19
ze Without dedicatee

The Bohemian duke Ulderich (Domenico Panzacchi) fell in love with the shepherdess Beatrice (Agata
Rizzi) while she was washing clothes. He wooed her, married her, and shared power with her. These
events stirred the jealousy of Ermelinda (Rosa Tartaglini), whom he had previously courted.*!

 La pastorella was first performed on 19 May 1751 (A) with six singers and eight dancers. The ballo
degli chej (Czech danceTM) was censored by the Council of Ten on the 29th and ordered removed from
the work. To assure that no effort would be made to reinstate the dance, the Council also mandated
that instrumentalists be enjoined from participating in the performance. This ruling may have
foreshadowed another in which, early in 1752, the Council of Ten outlawed the opening of opera houses
and masking during the next Ascension fair.TM*

A Score in D-Wa
Listed as Groppo 893; Wiel 538; Alm 1067

1751/7 Griselda Music by Gaetano Latilla
[GRISELDA]
A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1751-11-11~
& Without dedicatee
aad

This reappearance of Zeno's well-worn text, which had been set for Venetian productions by A. Pollarolo
(1701/1), Orlandini (1720/4), Albinoni (1728/3), and Vivaldi (1735/5), was only a midpoint on its long
trajectory. Settings by Piccinni and others kept it in use through the end of the eighteenth century. The
cast for the 1751 version featured Pietro Morighi (Gualtiero) and Prudenza Sani Grandi (Griselda).
 While no exact date of opening is known, the libretto was dedicated in November, and an opening in
the middle of the month is probable. When Griselda was given, mirrors were again mounted on the
outside of all of the boxes (see 1751/3). Groppo makes it clear that the desired effects of this practice,
which was also used in Naples, were dramatic,** not (as some recent commentaries have claimed) social.

5! Groppo (MS, p. 302) claimed that this was a remake of the like-named Corradi text of 1702/5, but the earlier work ostensibly treated English
history and is not related in any way.

*? Chej is an Italian transcription of the Czech word meaning Czech, thus indicating a Czech dance. To far cheo, in Venetian dialect, meant
not to hold oneself upright, to flop over.

53 ]-Vas, CX, Notatorio, Filza 1749-1751, entry of 29 Maggio 1751. The dancers named in the libretto were Rosa, Teresa, and Angiolino Lolli;
Elena Zerbina, Anna Roman, Giacomo Brighenti (the Bolognese leader of the troupe), G. B. Nichil, and Giulio Salamon.

4 GDN, Il, f. 10, entry of 4 Febraro 1751 M.V.

55 Con questo drama, Groppo (MS, p. 302) wrote, restorono adornati esteriormente tutti li palchi de specchi, apparato tale, che accende
ogni credenza.

1751/8

Ov



1751/9

i

ia)
On

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1750-59) 535

Arias in D-DIb
Listed as Groppo 895; Wiel 529; Alm 1069

Il conte Caramella Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi
[COUNT CARAMEL]
A dramma comico per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1751-11-13
Without dedicatee

The libretto carefully identified two serious roles (Olimpia, the wife of the count, and her lover, the
Marquis Ripoli); two half-serious ones (the countess's gardener, Dorina, and the count, who, although
thought to have died, has posed as a pilgrim); and three buffi (the servant Ghitta, the peasant Cecco,
and the tambourine player Brunoro). The underlying text has been traced to a work by Joseph Addison.**
Rustic ways are emphasized.

I conte Caramella opened on 13 November 1751.*7 It was also given for the last four nights of Carnival
(12-15 February) in 1752.* Francesco Delicati sang in the title role, with Catterina Zipoli (Countess
Olimpia), Salvatore Consorti (the Marquis), and Bartolomeo Cherubini (Brunoro). I] conte had numerous
reprises over the next fifteen years, many of them in Germany.

The 1748 reconstruction of San Samuele favored its rise as a venue for musical works. San Samuele
quickly became the premiere theater for opera buffa in Venice, thereby eclipsing the ailing San Cassiano.
The once peerless San Giovanni Grisostomo, the bastion of the dramma per musica for three quarters
of a century, now concentrated on comedies.

Scores in A-Wn; D-Wm, Wa; I-Gl, Mr; arias in US-BEm

Listed as Groppo 894; Wiel 539; Alm 1068, 1076

GI'impostori Music attributed to Gaetano Latilla
[THE IMPposToRS]

A dramma per musica Librettist(s) unknown?
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's?)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1751-11-15~
Without dedicatee

Somewhat derivative of plots in recent works, this drama features the tutor Aniceto (Francesco Baratti),
his daughter Elmira (Anna Querzoli Laschi), and her beloved Don Valerio (Filippo Laschi), who poses
as a gentleman of means. One aria added to the final scene was in French. No exact date of opening
is known, but the production seems to have started in November. A work with the same title, set by
Rinaldo di Capua, was given in Modena in 1751. According to Groppo, G/ impostori had a reprise
in winter 1752, preceding / tre cicisbei.'' This appears to mean that the work was brought back after
an unsuccessful trial of L isola d'amore.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 896; Wiel 534; Alm 1070

 Tambourine, or The Haunted House (1710), possibly by way of Nericault Destouches's Tambure notturne of 1736 (Ortolani, TO, x, 1308).

7 GDN, II, 3v. The first performance was given in Verona on 18 December 1749 (Stieger, Opernlexikon, i, 268).

5* Groppo MS, p. 304.

* Groppo (MS, p. 302) suggests that the work was a pastiche. Stieger (Opernlexikon, i/2, 610) gives the alternative title // mondo alla moda.
 See p. 78 of the libretto.

*' Groppo MS, p. 304. Neither of these later productions is cited in Sartori or Stieger, suggesting that the evidence has long since disappeared.

536

1751/10

Xe)

1751/11

i

O8

fi

1751c

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Le pescatrici Music attributed to Ferdinando Bertoni
[THE FISHERWOMEN]

A dramma giocoso per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1751-12-26

Dedicated to Louis Henri, the Marquis of Pons

Based on the model of ecloghie pescatorie, this work is constructed somewhat like a pastorale. It features
two comely fisherwomen, Nerina (Serafina Penni) and Lesbina (Marta Davia), each of whom is engaged
to the other's brother. The story is complicated by Lindoro (Salvatore Consorti), the prince of Sorrento,
whose appearance causes Nerina and Lesbina to betray their social aspirations, much to the
disappointment of their fiances. Lindoro is searching for the long-lost princess Eurilda (Catterina Zipoli),
who is falsely believed to be the daughter of the elderly fisherman Mastriccio (Bartolomeo Cherubini).
The action takes place on the beach of Taranto.

Le pescatrici was first performed on 26 December 1751. The dedication was signed on the 24th by
the impresario Prospero Olivieri. The work was extremely popular over the next two decades, eventually
achieving fourteen productions. The text was the fifteenth ofa group of sixteen which Goldoni produced
within four years (1748-52). The text was set, with revisions, by Haydn (Esterhazy, 1770) and Gassmann
(Vienna, 1771) among others.

Scores in D-B, Dlb, Wa; P-La; arias in F-Pc; US-BEm (fine 1752), Bp, CAi*

Listed as Groppo 898; Wiel 549; Alm 1072

L'isola d'amore Music by Gaetano Latilla
[THE ISLAND OF LOVE]

A commedia in musica Text attributed to Gasparo Gozzi
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1751-12-26
Without dedicatee

In this allegorical text the Island of Love is the home of youth. Purgonio (Francesco Baratti) is the ruler
of the island and Erodidascalo (Giuseppe Lecini) is its minister of love. The custodians of the island
are Finetta (Anna Querzoli) and Aspasia (Agata Ricci).

The opening date has to have been 26 December 1751 (GL). Gasparo Gozzi wrote to Luigi Pomo on
4 January 1752 (GL 126), reporting on the good reception his work was enjoying and noting that he
enjoyed singing some of the ariette to himself. He was pleased that he did not have to pay for the printing
of the libretti, but he spoke in rather disparaging terms of the impresario, [Pietro] Mingotti. Despite
Gozzi's positive impression of the reception, L isola was soon followed by a revival of its predecessor,
Gl'impostori (1751/9). However, it was revived in Treviso at the start of 1753. Metastasio's like-named
intermezzo, set by Sacchini in 1766, was popular into the 1780s.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 899; Wiel 546; Alm 1073

Ersilia. Cf. Supplement 3a.

 According to the dedication (signed by the impresario Prospero Olivieri), one of the Marquis's forebears had been among the first people
admitted to the Order of the Holy Spirit, established in 1579 by Henry III of France.

 Reported by the late G. T. Hollis in GO. This was probably based on one aria (Finche son bella) in US-BEm, MS 103. Another aria (Un
pescatore me I'ha fatta bretta) in the same source contains the final notation fine 1752.

 Excerpts from this work appeared in the Walsh print Favourite Songs in the Opera call'd Le Pescatrici (1761).

6 Although sometimes attributed to Gori, Soldini's edition of Gozzi's Lettere leaves no doubt that the work was Gozzi's. Gozzi signed the
libretto Antonio Rigo, usually read as an anagram for Antonio Gori, but in this case the motive may have been malicious.

 GL [Gozzi, Lettere], pp. xxxix, 231 ff.

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1750-59) 537

ILLUSTRATION 18 (above). A ticket (No. 3) to the opera at San Giovanni Grisosto-
mo (undated, but probably from the seventeenth century). The sun had long been a
symbol of the Grimani theaters. (Museo Correr)

ILLUSTRATION 19 (at right). A ticket to the comedy at San Samuele for Carnevale
1758. The motto says, Even as we joke we correct vice. (Ca' Goldoni)

ILLUSTRATION 20 (below). Crystal enhancements to the stage decor at the Teatro San Samuele (1753), when daytime tours were
offered independently from paid admission to evening performances. Note that the signs of the zodiac (seen in Illustration 18)
are absent, but the sun is retained.


538

1752/1

1752/2

Ow

1752/3

fs)


A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Venceslao Music by Antonio Gaetano Pampani
[WENCESLAS]

A dramma per musica Text by Apostolo Zeno
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1752-01-10~
Without dedicatee

This text was first set by C. F. Pollarolo (1703/4) and was subsequently produced in pastiche settings
(1722/5; 1723/3; 1735/8). Giuseppe Tebaldi sang in the title role in this version with Pietro Morighi
(Casimiro), Prudenza Sani Grandi (Lucinda), and Rosa Tartaglini (Erenice). The libretto was published
in MDCCL2 [sic]. Other factors suggest an opening in early January.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 897; Wiel 543; Alm 1071

Le virtuose ridicole Music attributed to Baldassare Galuppi
[THE RIDICULOUS VIRTUOSE]

A dramma giocoso per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1752-01-17~
Without dedicatee

Le virtuose, which was indebted to Moliere's Les Precieuses ridicules, makes fun of the pretensions
of female academicians (the virtuose of the title) in villeggiatura. The work features the philosopher
Aphrodisia (Catterina Zipoli), the poet Pegasino (Gio. Filippo Delicati) and poetess Melibea (Serafina
Penni), the singer Armonica (Cecilia Moblan), the historian Gazetta (Giovanni Leonardi), and the know-it-
all token male, Ser Saccente (Bartolomeo Cherubini), who sprinkles his pronouncements with Latin
phrases, plus the straight man Erideno (Salvatore Consorti).

On 22 October 1751 Goldoni wrote that he was glued to his desk from morning to night on a schedule
which prevented him from frequenting the theaters. This text and that of Le pescatrici completed his
cycle of sixteen comedies for San Samuele. Since both were intended for Carnival and Le pescatrici
opened immediately after Christmas 1751, Le virtuose must have opened in mid-January (1752).
The musical ignorance of Armonica was here likened to the spoiled but artless singer satirized in
Benedetto Marcello's I teatro alla moda. In the finale of Act Two, all of the performers played
instruments. The dance troupe of Pierre Aubri attracted much attention. The text was reset by Paisiello
(Parma, 1765) and Ottani (Dresden, 1769).

Score in D-W

Listed as Groppo 901; Wiel 550; Alm 1075

L' Adriano in Siria Music by Giuseppe Scarlatti
[HADRIAN IN SYRIA]
A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1752-01-26~
Without dedicatee

This version of Metastasio's popular text (1733/2; 1740/2) has been shortened and otherwise revised.
In the opening scene, set in the central square of Antioch, the spoils of a war with barbarians are on
display. Giuseppe Sidotti sang in the title role, with Giuseppe Tebaldi (Osroa), Prudenza Sani Grandi

7 The score was revised to include music chosen by the singers (musica a piacere de' cantanti), according to Groppo (MS, p. 304).
 Ortolani, TO, x, 1311.
 Ortolani, TO, x, 1313.

1752/4

Op

A

 1752a
 1752b
 1752
 1752d
 1752e
 1752f

1752/5

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1750-59) 539

(Emirena), and Rosa Tartaglini (Sabina), and Pietro Morighi (Farnaspe). While the sequential position
of this work is reasonably clear, no documentation of its opening survives.

Arias in US-BEm, Nyp

Listed as Groppo 900; Wiel 544; Alm 1074

I tre cicisbei ridicoli Music attributed to Natale Resta
[THE THREE SILLy Escorts]

A dramma giocoso per musica Text attributed to Carlo Antonio Vasini
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (Carnival)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1752-02-03~
Without dedicatee

This was a revival of 1748/4, although the first two acts were expanded and the cast was now named.
It featured Anna Querzoli (Modulina), Francesco Baratti (Giscone), Filippo Laschi (Lindoro), Francesca
Chiocci (Ottavio), Filippo Lecini (Cuccamondo), Francesca Mucci (Bice), Agata Ricci (Lidia), and
Angiola Massi (Corina). The apparent revival of G/'impostori after L isola d'amore suggests that the
only time available for this revival would have been late in this short Carnival period. The Council
of Ten voted on 4 February (GDN) to prohibit theatrical activity and masking during the coming spring.
It was on this prompt that the theater was sublet to Giovanni Fiorini and Antonio Codognato.

Score (attributed to Galuppi) in I-MOe
Listed as Groppo 902; Wiel 547; Alm 1077

Artaserse. Cf. Supplement 7.

Didone. Cf. Supplement 7.

Il conte Caramella. Cf. Supplement 5b.
L'amor della patria. Cf. Supplement 7.
Assumption cantata. Cf. Supplement 8.

Estro musicale giocoso. Cf. Supplement 7.

Antigono Pastiche attributed partly to Ferdinando Bertoni
[ANTIGONOS]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Autumn (St. Luke's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1752-11-04
Without dedicatee

This revival of Metastasio's text, which had been set by Bernasconi as 1745/3, opened on 4 November
1752. Gasparo Gozzi said the balli were good, while other aspects of the production were pitiful
(compatito). Pietro Sarselli now sang in the title role with Artemisia Landi as Berenice. The work
was given again in Modena in c. 1754.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 903; Wiel 545; Alm 1078

 The attribution to Bertoni appears in NGDDM/2. The libretto credits the music to diversi celebri auttori.
TM GDN, II, f. 34. The date is given as 1 November 1752 in NGDMM/2.
 Gozzi, Lettere, p. 252.

540 A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

1752/6 I portentosi effetti della Madre Natura Music attributed to Gius. Scarlatti
[THE MIRACULOUS EFFECTS OF MOTHER NATURE]

A dramma giocoso per musica Text by Carlo Goldoni
V1 Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)

With balli SORTING DATE: 1752-11-11
& Dedicated to Catterina Loredan Mocenigo, Nob. Ven.

This work, derived from Calderon, was situated on the island of Majorca, where the prince Celidoro
(Filippo Laschi), locked in a tower from childhood, has been released and discovers the appeal of the
opposite sex. This disrupts the plans of Ruggiero (Francesco Rolfi), who is married to the princess Lisaura
(Clementina Spagnuoli). The work opens with a thunderstorm, which indicates that Jupiter is in a bad
mood. Goldoni writes in the dedication that although the imperfections of both drammi per musica
and drammi buffi are so numerous that neither is appropriate for women of high merit, it is hoped that
this text might be thought suitable for wedding festivities. It suggests that the dedicatee and her groom
are both descended from the queen of Cyprus (Caterina Cornaro).

Owe Although GDN gives the opening date as 10 November, surviving libretti were dedicated on the 11th.
The balli were presented by a company of ten dancers headed by Francesco Sabioni plus two soloists
 Teresa Zambelli and Lodovico Ronzio. The text was reset by Piccinni as Le vicende della sorte
(1761). In February 1753 it was pointed out that when operas were given at San Samuele, decorations
now regularly festooned the boxes. Mirrors and lanterns were especially popular.

A Score in A-Wgm; aria in US-BEm
Listed as Groppo 904; Wiel 548; Alm 1079

1752/7 L' Olimpiade Music attributed to Gaetano Latilla
[THE OLYMPIAD]
A dramma per musica Text derived from Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Autumn (St. Martin's)
Given with balli SORTING DATE: 1752-11-18
& Dedicated to Noble Women
Oo This production of L 'Olimpiade opened on 18 November 1752. Latilla had been married on 5 November

1752 toa famous singer, the daughter of Giacomo Casarini, a Venetian. She had made her Venetian
debut almost a decade earlier in Lampugnani's setting of another Metastasian work, Ezio (San Samuele,
1743/6). Metastasio's text had four previous settings for performance in Venice. The earliest was
Vivaldi's (1734/4). The cast for this production included Domenico Pignotti (Clistene), Domenica
Casarini Latilla (Aristea), Mariano Nicolini (Megacle), and Francesco Amboni (Licida).

Ai Arias in D-DIb
Listed as Groppo 905; Wiel 542; Alm 1080

 This Venetian noblewoman, who was the niece of the new doge, had wed Giovanni Mocenigo (of the San Samuele line) in the spring of
1752. She was the last direct descendant of the Loredan family of Santo Stefano and died without heirs in 1815 (Ortolani, TO, xi, 1315).

TM Ortolani, TO, x, 1314.

5 A chorus of shepherds sings, Giove collerico/Trattieni i fulmini;/Armenti, e pecore/Non spaventar./Il Cielo e torbido,/I venti
fremono/Cessate, o pecore,/Di pascolar.

76 GDN, II, 34v. While a public performance would be unlikely to have occurred before printing the libretto, a private one was possible.
7 At least according to the libretto. GDN, I, f. 34, cites twelve.

78 GDN, Il, f. 46, entry of 17 Febraro 1752 M.V.

 GDN, Il, f. 35.

80 GDN, II, f. 34.

1752/8

coe)

1752/9

im

 &

1752/10

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1750-59) 541

La Calamita de' Cuori Music by Baldassare Galuppi
(Miss AMOROUS CALAMITY' ]

A dramma giocoso Text by Carlo Goldoni
Performed at San Samuele SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With a ballo SORTING DATE: 1752-12-26

Dedicated to the Most Noble Ladies of Venice

Calamita de' Cuori is the nickname for Bellarosa (Serafina Penni), whose personality is contrasted
to that of the love-sick Albina (Clementina Spagnuoli) and the ill-tempered Belinda (Agata Ricci). The
potential suitors and protectors are the faithful Armidoro (Francesco Rolfi), the charming Giacinto
(Filippo Laschi), the braggart Saracca (Giovanni Leonardi), and the avaricious Pignone (Niccola Petri).
The production also included a company of nine dancers and four independent ballarini. Bellarosa was
required to dance a minuet in Act One.

This enormously popular work was first performed on 26 December 1752 (GDN)."' The title-page is
dated 1753. When Serafina Penni appeared on-stage on 14 January, she was greeted by a standing
ovation. The production may have run until early February. La Calamita proved to be one of
Goldoni's best-known melodramas. It was later reset for performance in Vienna by Salieri (1774) and
Cimarosa (1792).

Scores in A-Wn; D-Bds, W; F-Pc; GB-Lbl (inc.); US-We; arias in I-CF, US-BEm, CAi

Listed as Groppo 907; Wiel 557; Alm 1082

Alessandro nell' Indie Music by Gaetano Latilla et al.
[ALEXANDER IN INDIA]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Cassiano SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's?)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1752-12-26~

Dedicated to the Most Noble Ladies of Venice

This was the fifth production based on Metastasio's popular text to be given in Venice in twenty years.
The dedication of the libretto was provided by the virtuosi, who would have included Domenico Pignotti
(Alessandro), Mariano Nicolini (Poro), Domenica Casarini Latilla (Cleofide), and Giuseppe Bettenbrich
(Erisena). The choreographer was Domenico Lupis (Paita). The printer's date of the libretto is 1753;
the available time for an opening was from just after Christmas through early January.

No musical sources known

Listed as Groppo 906; Wiel 552; Alm 1081

Il re pastore' Music by Giuseppe SartiTM
[THE SHEPHERD KING]

A dramma per musica Text by Pietro Metastasio
Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's?)
Without incidental items SORTING DATE: 1752-12-28~

Without dedicatee

5! Ortolani, TO, xi, 1267.

 GDN, II, f. 41v.

 Betnbrich in the libretto.

* Sarti (1729-1802) was from Faenza. He was currently maestro di cappella at the Teatro della Pergola in Florence, although he spent most
of the following decade in Copenhagen. This was his second opera and his first for Venice.

542



85 Te., Mont Blanc.

A NEW CHRONOLOGY OF VENETIAN OPERA

Domenico Negri (Alexander the Great) is cast with Domenica Scogli (Aminta), Chiara Marini (Elisa),
and Cecilia Maublanc (Zamiri) as well as Leopoldo Burgioni (Agenore) in this pastoral drama. /] re
pastore could have opened at almost any time between 26 December and the end of January. While
the story is silly enough to have suited the last nights of Carnival, it was the only work to be given during
the winter season at San Moise, and this favors an opening early in the period. As a newcomer to the
Venetian theater, Sarti attracted no notice during this Venetian debut.

The text was officially written for performance at Schenbrunn in May 1752, with the music of Giuseppe
Bonno, at the command of the empress, Maria Theresia, but Sarti's setting had been given at the Teatro
Sole, Pesaro, during Carnival 1751. Mozart's setting (K. 208) was performed at the Archbishop's palace,
Salzburg, in April 1775. Sarti, who was to spend a year (1766-67) as maestro at the Pieta in Venice,
became an important figure in the dissemination of Venetian opera and Italian music more generally,
both in Denmark, where he served as court Kapellmeister for the decade 1753-63, and in St. Petersburg,
where he provided music for the court for nearly twice that long (1782-1801).

No musical sources known
Listed as Groppo 908; Wiel 560; Alm 1083

Datable operas (1753-1760) are given in Supplement 2b, datable comedies (1749-1760) in Supplement

2c, and datable operas (1753-1760) in Supplement 2d.


