The 1660s: Chronology

1666/1 Demetrio Music by Carlo Pallavicino!

[DEMETRIOS]
A dramma per musica Text by Giacomo dall' Angelo

im Performed at San Moise SEASON: Winter (St. Stephen's)
With balli SORTING DATE: 1666-01-04~

is) Dedicated to three owners of the theater*
In this partly fictional account, Demetrios, the son of the deposed king of Syria, who had reigned in
the second century BC, was now married to Euridice, who is disguised as the warrior Aristandros.
Stratonica, a daughter by his first marriage, was in love with Seleukos, the son of Antiochos, the king
of Phrygia. Kleitarchos/Clitarco, the general of Demetrios's army, loved Lamia, with whom Demetrios
had now fallen in love.

ics) Given that the winter of 1666 offered a pre-Lenten season of maximum extent, the large number of

offerings with libretti dated in this year is no surprise. All could have been performed in the generous

' Carlo Pallavicino (c. 1640-1688) was to be the most prominent Italian opera composer in the 1670s and 1680s. Born in Sald (on the southwest
shore of Lake Garda), he served as a tenor (from 1649) and then as the organist for instrumentalists (organista ai concerti; from 1665) at
the church of Sant' Antonio in Padua. He appeared in operas in Venice from 1654. From c. 1667 to 1672, he worked at the Saxon court in
Dresden as vice Kapellmeister to the aging Heinrich Schiitz. After Schiitz's death (1672), Pallavicino returned to Venice, which remained
his principal residence until 1685. However, he maintained strong ties with the Saxon court, where his son (Stefano Benedetto, b. 1672) was
to serve as court poet (see Selfridge-Field, intro. to Pallavicino: MESSALINA, DMV, viii). This was Pallavicino's first opera.

? Like Aureli, Minato, and Businello, he was a member of the Accademia deg' Imperfetti, which exalted history and classical subjects.

3 The words ballo and balli have been retained on the advice of the late Irene Alm, whose extensive study of theatrical dance was truncated
by her untimely death (2000). It was her view that the modern English words dance and ball do not convey the same theatrical implications
as the Italian seicento word ballo. The performers were always in costume. Balli could have their own scenery; their music was often divorced
from surviving scores (and is therefore difficult to locate and identify). By the mid-eighteenth century, ba/li frequently had their own libretti,
could enjoy independent performance, and were more akin to the French ballet than an integral component of opera.

L.e., Giovanni da Mula, Matteo Pisani, and Matteo da Lezze. In 1661 da Lezze was one of three purchasers of a supernumerary position as
a procurator of San Marco (I-Fn A). His peers included Marco Contarini and Daniel Dolfin.

JO &

1666/2

A

5 Cesti (1623-69), a priest from Arezzo, was best known for his operas of the 1650s and early 1660s. His works were very highly esteemed

OPERA PRODUCTIONS (1660-69) 83

ten-week period between St. Stephen's and Shrove Tuesday. The libretto for Demetrio was dedicated
on | January 1666 and is likely to have opened by the 4th.

The first ballo may have presented a comic scene within a dignified formation, for the libretto says
that six pageboys were to display an insolent attitude towards the antics of the Old Woman and
Gellido before forming the dance. The choreography for the second ballo was also choreographed
for stage machinery: Apollo appeared in a cloud, Harmony ascended into the sky, and Celestial Rays
made a formation to present the actual ballo. The sets were designed by Gio. Battista Lambranzi, the
costumes by Orazio Franchi.

Score in I-Vnm

Listed as Galvani SMoi 16, Bonlini 96, Groppo 99, Alm 135